The West of England Combined Authority Order 2017 

Skip to main content 
Skip to navigation 
legislation.gov.uk 
https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk Cymraeg 

Home 
Explore our collections 
Research tools 
Help and guidance 
What's new 
About us 
Search Legislation 

Search Legislation
Title: (or keywords in the title) 
Year: 
Number: 
Type: All UK Legislation (excluding originating from the EU) -------------------------------------------- All Legislation (including originating from EU) -------------------------------------------- All Legislation originating from the EU that is amended by the UK -------------------------------------------- All Primary Legislation     UK Public General Acts     UK Local Acts     UK Private and Personal Acts     Acts of the Scottish Parliament     Acts of Senedd Cymru     Acts of the National Assembly for Wales     Measures of the National Assembly for Wales     Church Measures     Acts of the Northern Ireland Assembly     Acts of the Old Scottish Parliament     Acts of the English Parliament     Acts of the Old Irish Parliament     Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Local Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Private and Personal Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Northern Ireland Orders in Council     Measures of the Northern Ireland Assembly     Acts of the Northern Ireland Parliament -------------------------------------------- All Secondary Legislation     UK Statutory Instruments     Welsh Statutory Instruments     Scottish Statutory Instruments     Northern Ireland Statutory Rules     Church Instruments     UK Ministerial Directions     UK Ministerial Orders     UK Statutory Rules and Orders     Northern Ireland Statutory Rules and Orders -------------------------------------------- All Legislation originating from the EU     Regulations originating from the EU     Regulations originating from the EU that are amended by the UK     Decisions originating from the EU     Decisions originating from the EU that are amended by the UK     Directives originating from the EU     European Union Treaties -------------------------------------------- All Draft Legislation     UK Draft Statutory Instruments     Scottish Draft Statutory Instruments     Northern Ireland Draft Statutory Rules -------------------------------------------- All Impact Assessments     UK Impact Assessments 
Search 
Advanced Search 
The West of England Combined Authority Order 2017
You are here:
UK Statutory Instruments 
2017 No. 126 
Table of contents

Table of Contents 
Content 
Explanatory Memorandum 
More Resources 
Plain View 
Print Options 

What Version

Latest available (Revised) 
Original (As made) 

Opening Options

Open whole Instrument 
Open Instrument without Schedules 
Open Schedules only 

More Resources

Original: King's Printer Version 

View more 

Changes to legislation:
There are currently no known outstanding effects for The West of England Combined Authority Order 2017. 
Changes to Legislation
Revised legislation carried on this site may not be fully up to date. At the current time any known changes or effects made by subsequent legislation have been applied to the text of the legislation you are viewing by the editorial team. Please see ‘Frequently Asked Questions’ for details regarding the timescales for which new effects are identified and recorded on this site.

Introductory Text 

PART 1 General 
1. Citation and commencement 

2. Interpretation 

PART 2 Establishment of a combined authority for the West of England; election of the Mayor; funding 
3. Establishment 

4. Constitution 

5. Mayor 

6. Funding 

PART 3 Transport 
7. Power to pay grant 

8. Local transport 

9. Agreements between authorities and strategic highways companies 

PART 4 Planning 
10. Spatial development strategy 

11. Adaptation of enactments in consequence of article 10 

12. Planning applications of potential strategic importance 

PART 5 Mayoral development corporations 
13. Conferral of functions on the Combined Authority 

14. Application of provisions in the 2011 Act 

15. Incidental provisions 

16. Section 5 of the 1989 Act (designation and reports of... 

17. Section 32 of the 2003 Act applies in relation to... 

PART 6 Housing and regeneration 
18. Conferral of functions corresponding to functions that the HCA has in relation to the Area 

19. Acquisition and appropriation of land for planning and public purposes 

20. Condition on the exercise of the functions conferred by articles 18 and 19 

21. Application of provisions of the 1985 Act, the 1990 Act and the 2008 Act 

PART 7 Functions of the Combined Authority exercisable only by the Mayor; political advisers 
22. General functions of the Combined Authority exercisable only by the Mayor 

23. Political advisers 

PART 8 Additional functions 
24. General power of competence 

25. Economic development and regeneration functions 

26. Incidental provisions 

27. (1) The Combined Authority has the power to exercise any... 

28. Section 13 of the 1989 Act (voting rights of members... 

29. In Part 2 of Schedule 3 (pension funds) to the... 

Signature 

SCHEDULE 1 
1. Membership 

2. Chair and vice-chair 

3. (1) The Combined Authority must appoint a vice-chair from among... 

4. Proceedings 

5. Overview and scrutiny committees 

6. Records 

7. Standing orders 

8. Remuneration and pensions 

SCHEDULE 2 
Spatial development strategy 
PART 1 
Modification of the application of Part 8 of the 1999 Act 
1. (1) Part 8 of the 1999 Act (planning) is modified... 

PART 2 
2. (1) Sections 19 (preparation of local development documents), 24 (conformity... 

SCHEDULE 3 
Modification of the application of Part 8 of the 2011 Act 
1. (1) Part 8 of the 2011 Act (Mayoral development corporations)... 

SCHEDULE 4 
Modification of the application of Chapters 1 and 2 of Part 1 of the 2008 Act 
1. (1) Chapters 1 and 2 of Part 1 of the... 

SCHEDULE 5 
Economic development and regeneration functions 
1. The functions of the constituent councils under section 1 of... 

2. The power under section 144 of the Local Government Act... 

3. The duties under sections 15ZA, 15ZB, 15ZC, 17 and 18A(1)(b)... 

4. The duty under section 69 of the 2009 Act (duty... 

Explanatory Note 

Back to top 

Options/Help
Print Options
Print Table of Contents
PDF
table of contents 
Web page table of contents 

Print The Whole
Instrument
PDF The Whole
Instrument 
Web page The Whole
Instrument 

Legislation is available in different versions:
Latest Available (revised): The latest available updated version of the legislation incorporating changes made by subsequent legislation and applied by our editorial team. Changes we have not yet applied to the text, can be found in the ‘Changes to Legislation’ area.
Original (As Enacted or Made): The original version of the legislation as it stood when it was enacted or made. No changes have been applied to the text.

Opening Options
Different options to open legislation in order to view more content on screen at once

Explanatory Memorandum
Explanatory Memorandum sets out a brief statement of the purpose of a Statutory Instrument and provides information about its policy objective and policy implications. They aim to make the Statutory Instrument accessible to readers who are not legally qualified and accompany any Statutory Instrument or Draft Statutory Instrument laid before Parliament from June 2004 onwards.

More Resources
Access essential accompanying documents and information for this legislation item from this tab. Dependent on the legislation item being viewed this may include:
the original print PDF of the as enacted version that was used for the print copy
lists of changes made by and/or affecting this legislation item
confers power and blanket amendment details
all formats of all associated documents
correction slips
links to related legislation and further information resources

Timeline of Changes
This timeline shows the different points in time where a change occurred. The dates will coincide with the earliest date on which the change (e.g an insertion, a repeal or a substitution) that was applied came into force. The first date in the timeline will usually be the earliest date when the provision came into force. In some cases the first date is 01/02/1991 (or for Northern Ireland legislation 01/01/2006). This date is our basedate. No versions before this date are available. For further information see the Editorial Practice Guide and Glossary under Help.

More Resources
Use this menu to access essential accompanying documents and information for this legislation item. Dependent on the legislation item being viewed this may include:
the original print PDF of the as made version that was used for the print copy
correction slips

Click 'View More' or select 'More Resources' tab for additional information including:
lists of changes made by and/or affecting this legislation item
confers power and blanket amendment details
all formats of all associated documents
links to related legislation and further information resources

The data on this page is available in the alternative data formats listed: HTML5 alternative version 
HTML snippet alternative version 
PDF alternative version 
XML alternative version 
Akoma Ntoso alternative version 
HTML RDFa alternative version 

New site design 
Help 
About us 
Site map 
Accessibility 
Contact us 
Privacy notice 
Cookies 

All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated . This site additionally contains content derived from EUR-Lex, reused under the terms of the Commission Decision 2011/833/EU on the reuse of documents from the EU institutions. For more information see the EUR-Lex public statement on re-use . 
© Crown and database right
