The Road User Charging And Workplace Parking Levy (Classes Of Motor Vehicles) (England) Regulations 2001 

Skip to main content 
Skip to navigation 
legislation.gov.uk 
https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk Cymraeg 

Home 
Explore our collections 
Research tools 
Help and guidance 
What's new 
About us 
Search Legislation 

Search Legislation
Title: (or keywords in the title) 
Year: 
Number: 
Type: All UK Legislation (excluding originating from the EU) -------------------------------------------- All Legislation (including originating from EU) -------------------------------------------- All Legislation originating from the EU that is amended by the UK -------------------------------------------- All Primary Legislation     UK Public General Acts     UK Local Acts     UK Private and Personal Acts     Acts of the Scottish Parliament     Acts of Senedd Cymru     Acts of the National Assembly for Wales     Measures of the National Assembly for Wales     Church Measures     Acts of the Northern Ireland Assembly     Acts of the Old Scottish Parliament     Acts of the English Parliament     Acts of the Old Irish Parliament     Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Local Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Private and Personal Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Northern Ireland Orders in Council     Measures of the Northern Ireland Assembly     Acts of the Northern Ireland Parliament -------------------------------------------- All Secondary Legislation     UK Statutory Instruments     Welsh Statutory Instruments     Scottish Statutory Instruments     Northern Ireland Statutory Rules     Church Instruments     UK Ministerial Directions     UK Ministerial Orders     UK Statutory Rules and Orders     Northern Ireland Statutory Rules and Orders -------------------------------------------- All Legislation originating from the EU     Regulations originating from the EU     Regulations originating from the EU that are amended by the UK     Decisions originating from the EU     Decisions originating from the EU that are amended by the UK     Directives originating from the EU     European Union Treaties -------------------------------------------- All Draft Legislation     UK Draft Statutory Instruments     Scottish Draft Statutory Instruments     Northern Ireland Draft Statutory Rules -------------------------------------------- All Impact Assessments     UK Impact Assessments 
Search 
Advanced Search 
The Road User Charging And Workplace Parking Levy (Classes Of Motor Vehicles) (England) Regulations 2001
You are here:
UK Statutory Instruments 
2001 No. 2793 
Whole
Instrument

Table of Contents 
Content 
More Resources 
Previous 
Next 

Plain View 
Print Options 

What Version

Latest available (Revised) 
Original (As made) 

Opening Options

Open whole Instrument 
Open Instrument without Schedules 
Open Schedules only 

More Resources

Original: King's Printer Version 

View more 

Status:
This is the original version (as it was originally made). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.

Statutory Instruments
2001 No. 2793
ROAD TRAFFIC
ENGLAND
The Road User Charging And Workplace Parking Levy (Classes Of Motor Vehicles) (England) Regulations 2001
Made
2nd August 2001

Laid before Parliament
3rd August 2001

Coming into force
28th August 2001

The Secretary of State for Transport, Local Government and the Regions, in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 197(1) and 198(3) of the Transport Act 2000( 1 ), hereby makes the following Regulations: 

Citation, commencement and extent
1. —(1) These Regulations may be cited as the Road User Charging and Workplace Parking Levy (Classes of Motor Vehicles) (England) Regulations 2001 and shall come into force on 28th August 2001. 
(2) These Regulations only extend to England. 
Classes of motor vehicles
2. —(1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the classes of motor vehicles listed in the Schedule to these Regulations are classes of motor vehicles specified for the purposes of Part III of the Transport Act 2000 (road user charging and the workplace parking levy). 
(2) In relation to Part IV of the Schedule, classes M 2 (a), M 2 (b), M 3 (a) and M 3 (b) are not specified in relation to charging schemes and licensing schemes which specify charges for motor vehicles by reference to classes MAB(1)(a), MAB(1)(b), MAB(2)(a), MAB(2)(b), MAB(3)(a) or MAB(3)(b). 
(3) In relation to Part V of the Schedule, classes N 1 (a), N 1 (b), N 2 (a), N 2 (b), N 3 (a) and N 3 (b) are not specified in relation to charging schemes and licensing schemes which specify charges for motor vehicles by reference to classes NAB(1)(a), NAB(1)(b), NAB(2)(a), NAB(2)(b), NAB(3)(a) or NAB(3)(b). 
Signed by authority of the Secretary of State for Transport, Local Government and the Regions 
Sally Keeble
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State,
Department for Transport, Local Government and the Regions

Regulation 2
SCHEDULE CLASSES OF MOTOR VEHICLES 

PART I Interpretation 
In this Schedule— 
“cm 3 ” means cubic centimetres; 
“kg” means kilograms; 
“km/h” means kilometres per hour; 
“kW” means kilowatts; 
“maximum mass” means the technically permissible maximum laden mass as specified by the manufacturer; 
“maximum speed” means the speed which the vehicle is incapable, by reason of its construction, of exceeding on the level under its own power when fully laden; 
“trailer” means a vehicle drawn by a motor vehicle; 
“semi-trailer” means a trailer which is constructed or adapted to form part of an articulated vehicle including (without prejudice to the generality of that) a vehicle which is not itself a motor vehicle but which has some or all of its wheels driven by the drawing vehicle; and 
“unladen mass” excludes, in the case of motor vehicles propelled wholly or partly by electricity, the mass of its batteries. 

PART II Two or three-wheel motor vehicles and quadricycles 
Mopeds
Class A(a) 
A two or three-wheel motor vehicle with or without a side-car which is fitted with an internal combustion engine having a cylinder capacity not exceeding 50 cm 3 and a maximum speed of not more than 45 km/h. 
Class A(b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class A(a) which is drawing a trailer. 
Motorcycles
Class B(a) 
A two-wheel motor vehicle (other than a moped) with or without a sidecar which— 
(a) is fitted with an internal combustion engine having a cylinder capacity of more than 50 cm 3 ; or 
(b) has a maximum speed of more than 45 km/h. 
Class B(b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class B(a) which is drawing a trailer. 
Motor tricycles
Class C(a) 
A three wheel motor vehicle (other than a moped) with three symmetrically arranged wheels which— 
(a) is fitted with an internal combustion engine having a cylinder capacity of more than 50 cm 3 ; or 
(b) a maximum speed of more than 45 km/h. 
Class C(b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class C(a) which is drawing a trailer. 
Light quadricycles
Class D(a) 
A four-wheel motor vehicle having— 
(a) an unladen mass of less than 350 kg; 
(b) a maximum speed of not more than 45 km/h; and 
(c) in the case of a vehicle with a spark ignition engine, an engine with a cylinder capacity not exceeding, 50 cm 3 and, in the case of vehicles with other types of engine, an engine with a maximum net power not exceeding 4 kW. 
Class D(b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class D(a) which is drawing a trailer. 
Quadricycles
Class E(a) 
A four wheel motor vehicle (other than a light quadricycle) which has— 
(a) an unladen mass of, in the case of vehicles intended for carrying goods, not more than 550 kg and, in other cases, not more than 400kg; and 
(b) an engine with a maximum net engine power not exceeding 15kW. 
Class E(b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class E(a) which is drawing a trailer. 

PART III 
Motor caravan
Class L(a) 
A motor vehicle which— 
(a) has at least four wheels; 
(b) has an unladen mass exceeding 400kg or an engine with a net power exceeding 15kw; 
(c) is used for the carriage of passengers; and 
(d) is constructed to include living accommodation containing at least the following equipment: 
(i) seats and a table; 
(ii) sleeping accommodation which may be converted from the seats; 
(iii) cooking facilities; and 
(iv) storage facilities, 
all of which equipment is rigidly fixed to the living compartment notwithstanding that the table may be designed to be easily removable. 
Class L(b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class L(a) which is drawing a trailer. 

PART IV Category M: Motor vehicles with at least four wheels used for the carriage of passengers 
In this Part, references to a “motor vehicle” are to a motor vehicle with or without a semi-trailer which— 
(a) has at least four wheels; 
(b) has an unladen mass exceeding 400kg or an engine with net power exceeding 15kW; 
(c) is used for the carriage of passengers; and 
(d) is not a motor caravan within Class L(a) or Class L(b) specified in Part III above. 
Sub-category M 1 
Class M 1 (a) 
A motor vehicle which comprises no more than eight seats in addition to the driver’s seat. 
Class M 1 (b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class M 1 (a) which is drawing a trailer. 
Sub-category M 2 
Class M 2 (a) 
A motor vehicle which comprises more than eight seats in addition to the driver’s seat, and has a maximum mass not exceeding 5 tonnes. 
Class M 2 (b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class M 2 (a) which is drawing a trailer. 
Sub-category M 3 
Class M 3 (a) 
A motor vehicle which comprises more than eight seats in addition to the driver’s seat, and has a maximum mass exceeding 5 tonnes. 
Class M 3 (b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class M 3 (a) which is drawing a trailer. 
Sub-category M Axle-based (1)
Class MAB(1)(a) 
A motor vehicle which comprises more than eight seats in addition to the driver’s seat and has two axles. 
Class MAB(1)(b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class MAB(1)(a) which is drawing a trailer. 
Sub-category M Axle-based (2)
Class MAB(2)(a) 
A motor vehicle which comprises more than eight seats in addition to the driver’s seat and has three axles. 
Class MAB(2)(b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class MAB(2)(a) which is drawing a trailer. 
Sub-category M Axle-based (3)
Class MAB(3)(a) 
A motor vehicle which comprises more than eight seats in addition to the driver’s seat and has more than three axles. 
Class MAB(3)(b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class MAB(3)(a) which is drawing a trailer. 

PART V Category N: Motor vehicles with at least four wheels used for the carriage of goods 
In this Part references to a “motor vehicle” are to a motor vehicle with or without a semi-trailer which— 
(a) has at least four wheels; 
(b) has an unladen mass exceeding 550kg or an engine with power exceeding 15kW; and 
(c) is used for the carriage of goods. 
Sub-Category N 1 
Class N 1 (a) 
A motor vehicle which has a maximum mass not exceeding 3.5 tonnes. 
Class N 1 (b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class N 1 (a) which is drawing a trailer. 
Category N 2 
Class N 2 (a) 
A motor vehicle which has a maximum mass exceeding 3.5 tonnes but not exceeding 12 tonnes. 
Class N 2 (b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class N 2 (a) which is drawing a trailer. 
Category N 3 
Class N 3 (a) 
A motor vehicle which has a maximum mass exceeding 12 tonnes. 
Class N 3 (b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class N 3 (a) which is drawing a trailer. 
N Axle-based (1)
Class NAB(1)(a) 
A motor vehicle which has two axles. 
Class NAB(1)(b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class NAB(1)(a) which is drawing a trailer. 
N Axle-based (2)
Class NAB(2)(a) 
A motor vehicle which has three axles. 
Class NAB(2)(b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class NAB(2)(a) which is drawing a trailer. 
N Axle-based (3)
Class NAB(3)(a) 
A motor vehicle which has more than three axles. 
Class NAB(3)(b) 
A motor vehicle as defined in Class NAB(3)(a) which is drawing a trailer. 
Explanatory Note
(This note is not part of the Regulations) 
These Regulations only extend to England. They relate to the provisions of Part III of the Transport Act 2000 (“the 2000 Act”) which enable road user charging (“charging”) or workplace parking levy (“licensing”) schemes to be made, inter alia,— 
(a) by a non-metropolitan local traffic authority (a local traffic authority for an area outside Greater London); 
(b) jointly by more than one non-metropolitan local traffic authority; or 
(c) jointly by one or more non-metropolitan local traffic authorities and one or more London traffic authorities (Transport for London, a London borough council or the Common Council of the City of London). 
Section 171(1)(c ) of the 2000 Act requires a charging scheme to specify the classes of motor vehicles in respect of which charges are imposed. Section 186(3)(d) of the Act provides that charges that may be imposed by a licensing scheme include different charges for different classes of motor vehicles. Section 198(3) of the Act requires classes for these purposes to be defined by regulations. 
Regulation 2(1) provides for the classes of motor vehicles listed in the Schedule to the Regulations to be classes of motor vehicles for the purposes of Part III of the 2000 Act. 
Regulation 2(2) and (3) provides that in relation to Parts IV and V of the Schedule, certain classes of motor vehicles (which are defined, inter alia, by reference to their maximum mass) are not specified in relation to charging and licensing schemes which specify charges for certain classes of motor vehicles (which are defined, inter alia, by reference to the number of their axles). The effect of these provisions is to ensure that a charging or licensing scheme cannot impose charges for classes of motor vehicles by reference to their maximum mass as well as the number of their axles. 
The definitions of classes of motor vehicles in Part II of the Schedule are based on definitions in Article 1 of Council Directive 92/61/EEC of 30 June 1992 relating to the type-approval of two or three-wheel motor vehicles (O.J. L225, 10. 08. 92, p.72. Directive as amended by the Act of Accession 1994). 
The definitions of classes of motor vehicles in Parts III, IV and V of the Schedule are based on the definitions in Annex II of Council Directive 70/156/EEC of 6th February 1970 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the type-approval of motor vehicles and their trailers (O.J. L42, 23. 02. 70, p.1) as last amended by Directive 98/91/EC (O.J. L11, 16. 01. 99, p.25). 
Copies of the Directives referred to in this Explanatory Note can be obtained from the Stationery Office. 
( 1 )
2000 c. 38 . See the definition of “the appropriate national authority” in section 198(1). 

Previous 
Next 

Back to top 

Options/Help
Print Options
Official printed copies
Order a copy of this legislation buy now 

Print The Whole
Instrument
PDF The Whole
Instrument 
Web page The Whole
Instrument 

Legislation is available in different versions:
Latest Available (revised): The latest available updated version of the legislation incorporating changes made by subsequent legislation and applied by our editorial team. Changes we have not yet applied to the text, can be found in the ‘Changes to Legislation’ area.
Original (As Enacted or Made): The original version of the legislation as it stood when it was enacted or made. No changes have been applied to the text.

Opening Options
Different options to open legislation in order to view more content on screen at once

More Resources
Access essential accompanying documents and information for this legislation item from this tab. Dependent on the legislation item being viewed this may include:
the original print PDF of the as enacted version that was used for the print copy
lists of changes made by and/or affecting this legislation item
confers power and blanket amendment details
all formats of all associated documents
correction slips
links to related legislation and further information resources

More Resources
Use this menu to access essential accompanying documents and information for this legislation item. Dependent on the legislation item being viewed this may include:
the original print PDF of the as made version that was used for the print copy
correction slips

Click 'View More' or select 'More Resources' tab for additional information including:
lists of changes made by and/or affecting this legislation item
confers power and blanket amendment details
all formats of all associated documents
links to related legislation and further information resources

The data on this page is available in the alternative data formats listed: HTML5 alternative version 
HTML snippet alternative version 
PDF alternative version 
XML alternative version 
Akoma Ntoso alternative version 
HTML RDFa alternative version 
RDF/XML alternative version 

New site design 
Help 
About us 
Site map 
Accessibility 
Contact us 
Privacy notice 
Cookies 

All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated . This site additionally contains content derived from EUR-Lex, reused under the terms of the Commission Decision 2011/833/EU on the reuse of documents from the EU institutions. For more information see the EUR-Lex public statement on re-use . 
© Crown and database right
