West of England
Bus Service Improvement Plan

June 2024
Contents
Executive Summary 2

Section One - Our Bus Vision 4

Section Two - Current Offer to Bus Passengers 7

Section Three - Improvement Programme to 2025 18

Section Four - Ambitions and Proposals for 2025 to 2035 and beyond 25

Section Five - Targets, Performance Monitoring and Reporting 48

Letters of Support 51

Appendix A - Our Bus Vision 55

Appendix B - Current Bus Offer to Passengers 59

Appendix C - Improvements Programme to 2024/25 93

Appendix D - Ambitions and Proposals for 2025-2035 110

1
Executive Summary
This document provides a refresh to the West of England Bus Service Improvement Plan (BSIP)
originally published in October 2021, and later updated in December 2022, by the West of England
Mayoral Combined Authority and North Somerset Council. The original Bus Service Improvement
Plan built on the West of England Bus Strategy (2020) and formed part of a bid to government
for funding. The Department for Transport (DfT) awarded £105m for the delivery of the West of
England BSIP alongside City Region Sustainable Transport Settlement (CRSTS) funding for bus
infrastructure. The revenue funding in BSIP in particular has created the opportunity to make
significant improvements to the bus network in the region.
This BSIP refresh sets out how we aim to achieve a well-connected sustainable bus network that
works for more residents, businesses, and visitors across the region; a network that offers more
reliable, affordable, and integrated travel options to encourage and help people switch from cars to
bus travel. An improved transport network will help deliver economic growth and facilitate better
access to education, employment, and services.
The Mayoral Combined Authority and all local authorities in the BSIP area have declared a climate
emergency accompanied by climate action plans. To tackle the climate emergency, we need to
support a sustainable transport network and encourage more low-carbon trips within the region.
To achieve this, we need to provide an easy, affordable, convenient, and sustainable alternative to
private cars.
Since the last update, BSIP initiatives have been revisited, developed, and evaluated. All the short-
and long-term proposals in this document will also be reviewed when the next full BSIP is published
as per the DfT guidance.
This BSIP refresh outlines our updated Bus Vision for the future and the seven objectives we have
set to achieve this. Initiatives have been reviewed to reflect what can be delivered as a priority with
the BSIP funding until March 2025 and up to March 2027 with CRSTS funding, as well as maintaining
a vision for the longer term.

2
Section One
Our Bus Vision

3
Our Bus Vision
Buses in the West of England need to become the first choice for more people. We want to
build a more reliable, more financially sustainable bus network, that integrates well with wider
public transport so that catching the bus is easier, more convenient and a better experience for
passengers.
Our Bus Vision, collectively shared by the West of England Enhanced Partnership and aligned
to the regional Joint Local Transport Plan, is supported by seven high-level objectives that are
fundamental to the delivery of our Bus Service Improvement Plan.

20%
1. High mode share for buses of overall travel market
2. High quality bus service
3. High quality waiting environment
4. High vehicle standards
5. High level of passenger satisfaction
6. High quality information bus passenger growth
7. Low fares, simple ticketing, and easy means of payment from 2021/22

Each high-level objective has several
attributes (set out in Appendix A), which Passenger
together describe the bus network that we
Experience
will aim to deliver for the region. s
orm
The objectives are focused on the passenger Impro Inf
experience. They also reflect the outcomes ve
we are currently delivering through the
West of England Enhanced Partnership VISION
(EP). We are currently considering a range
of options for future bus delivery, including BSIP 7
franchising. Proposals Objectives
The passenger experience is focused on the
passenger journey cycle, i.e. all the stages
in making a bus journey (see Section 4). Dictates
These are all improved through the actions
in this Bus Service Improvement Plan.

Delivering Our Bus Vision & measuring success by 2035
Our Bus Service Improvement Plan sets out ambitious targets to measure success against Our Bus
Vision by 2035 including: reducing bus journey times by 10%; ensuring 95% of services run on time;
growing bus passenger trips by 24% from pre-pandemic levels; increasing passenger satisfaction to
95%; and requiring 100% of buses to be zero emission (by 2035). It is recognised that the levers to
achieve these ambitions are held by a variety of different stakeholders, so the Enhanced Partnership
is thus vital to ensure all are pulling together.

4
Our Region and the Delivery Partners
The current Bus Service Improvement Plan (BSIP) investment programme has already generated
passenger growth across our region of 20% from 2021/22 to 2022/23. Our plans will now look to
accelerate this growth using a combination of approaches across, some tested and some innovative
and new.
The BSIP area is a diverse region with over 1.1 million residents spread across several large urban
and rural areas. It covers the areas of two local transport authorities, the West of England Mayoral
Combined Authority (MCA), and North Somerset Council (NSC). Within the MCA highway powers
are held by Bristol City Council (BCC), South Gloucestershire Council (SGC), Bath and North East
Somerset Council (B&NES), with NSC being a highway authority in its own right. Our BSIP brings
together in one area the cities of Bristol and Bath, and towns including Chipping Sodbury, Clevedon,
Keynsham, Saltford, Midsomer Norton, Nailsea, Portishead, Radstock, Thornbury, Weston-super-
Mare, and Yate, as well as many other towns, villages, and hamlets.
Our BSIP area (shown in Figure 1) reflects the West of England Joint Local Transport Plan (JLTP)
area and is diverse and vibrant with an economy worth over £35bn each year. It exceeds average
national growth levels and has the highest productivity of all city regions in England outside London.
Figure 1 Our BSIP Area

BCC, SGC, and B&NES are part of the West of England Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA) which is
the local transport authority (LTA). NSC is currently partnered with the MCA to deliver a joint BSIP.
This partnership, together with principal bus operators and representatives of smaller bus
companies through the EP structure has prepared and agreed this BSIP in line with its existing
regional partnership under the JLTP. However, this is a refresh of a previously agreed BSIP
document and any wider decisions about funding, governance and partnership arrangements will be
considered for a larger refresh likely to be due in 2025.

5
About Our BSIP and the JLTP
This BSIP demonstrates our progress to date and looks forward over a four-year period to 2028/29
to set short-term proposals in addition to setting out longer-term ambitions across a ten-year period
to 2034/35. The proposals and ambitions set out are not predicated on any particular management
and/or delivery mechanism (for example Enhanced Partnership or franchising).
Our BSIP will be refreshed in 2025 in line with DfT guidance. It will be reviewed and updated
as needed and details reported to the West of England Planning, Housing & Transport Board
(comprising the Mayor of the West of England and Members of BCC, SGC, B&NES Council, and NSC’s
Executive Member). The BSIP will be published on the MCA and NSC websites, with the monitoring
and reporting being aligned with the DfT’s recently announced annual Bus Connectivity Assessment
(BCA) process.
An Enhanced Partnership (EP) covering our BSIP area commenced in February 2023. It has an
EP Advisory Panel sat beneath an EP Board. This helps ensure wide buy-in on decisions through
informed and constructive dialogue at both political and operational levels. The EP works with
neighbouring local transport authorities to maintain, improve, and jointly administer cross-boundary
bus services and links between important local centres, regardless of administrative boundaries.
The West of England BSIP sits under the overarching JLTP. It also sits alongside other policy and
strategy documents, and specifically aligns with the Western Gateway’s Strategic Transport Plan,
Local Cycling & Walking Investment Programmes, the Bath Transport Delivery Action Plan and
Journey to Net Zero, and the Bristol Transport Plan and each partner’s rural strategy. Importantly,
the BSIP complements the West of England Bus Strategy which remains an active strategy
document for the region. However, we will look to rationalise these two documents in the future. A
summary of relevant local policies and strategies is shown in Figure 1 in Appendix A.
The regional JLTP4 aims to ensure that transport is carbon neutral by 2030. To achieve this, we
need to encourage a substantial shift towards cleaner and more sustainable methods of transport.
This refreshed BSIP supplements JLTP4 by specifying the interventions that aim to encourage more
users on the bus network.
The current National Bus Strategy sets out a clear vision for buses across England and goals for
each local transport authority. Appendix A summarises the West of England BSIP partners’ current
and continued approach to meeting these goals.

6
Section Two
Current Offer to
Bus Passengers
7
The Current Bus Network
Passengers want to see an improved bus network across the West of England and North Somerset.
Starting from the current network we have a guiding principle, linked to Our Bus Vision, which will
be used to drive our proposals and ambitions from 2025 onwards. Key to success will always be
encouraging growth in the number of fare paying passengers.

A stronger core network
A stronger core network that is financially self-
supporting with more reliable buses and passenger
numbers that are continually growing is vital to
contribute to the virtuous cycle of success. To
encourage this growth, the MCA and NSC will
continue to enhance commercial main routes to
increase frequency of services creating more turn-
up-and-go frequencies, and 15-minute frequencies in
market towns.

Bringing new passengers to the
network
WEST link is our current DRT solution and allows
passengers in more remote areas to pre-book
minibus journeys from their nearest bus stop to
connect onto key bus corridors and the rail network.
WEST link covers more remote areas previously not
connected to the public transport network. Other
public transport interventions, with the similar
aims to increase bus use and linked trips across
the region include WEST local and WEST busstop+
(encouraging linked trips between buses, cycling and
micromobility options).

metrobus is one of our most significant
investments over the last decade
This is a high-quality Bus Rapid Transit network
of four limited-stop routes focussed on Bristol city
centre, covering nearly 50 miles of route. It features
bus lanes and segregated busways, bus stops with
high profile shelters and iPoints (to sell tickets and
give real-time information) and very low emission
biomethane buses.

8
Introduction - Bus use in the BSIP area
This section provides an overview of the current bus network against the objectives outlined in the
2021 BSIP and is supported by a technical appendix. The data presented here is an update on that
included in the 2021 BSIP. The latest available data has been used, which in some cases is from
2022/2023.

2021 Objective: High Mode Share for Buses of the Overall Travel Market
Bus use in the BSIP area grew consistently over the fifteen years prior to the pandemic, albeit from
a relatively low base. Some of this growth was related to changes in population and economic
performance, but a significant part followed from investment in infrastructure, vehicles, fares,
and services. With the introduction of lockdown measures in March 2020, as elsewhere in the UK,
passenger numbers fell dramatically, recovering gradually in response to the easing of social
distancing and the re-opening of the economy. According to the latest data, passenger services
nationally have recovered to 76% of pre-pandemic levels. In the West of England region bus use has
gradually recovered since the pandemic, with passenger numbers returning to 85% of pre-pandemic
levels in the second quarter of 2023/24.
Following the pandemic, passenger journeys per head in the area have increased at a rate of 20%
year on year, as illustrated below. This increase is higher than the average for England, and North
Somerset has seen an increase of 26% year on year, reflecting effective investment in supported
services and ‘kickstart’ funding for enhancement to commercial services. This investment was
enabled by BSIP funding awarded to the MCA and NSC.
With the changes to commuting and leisure activities, it is recognised that there is a limit to
encouraging pre-pandemic passengers back to buses. Bus passenger figures now show that in the
West of England the number of individual passengers making journeys has surpassed pre pandemic
levels. However, passengers are making fewer journeys. This appears to be due to systemic societal
changes such as a switch to hybrid working, greater on-line shopping, medical appointments etc.
Reflecting this, it is therefore necessary to encourage new passengers onto the network and to
encourage existing passengers to make different journeys (e.g. ‘3-day a week commuters’ to make
leisure trips).
Figure 3 – Passenger journeys per head per local authority in the last five years

9
2021 Objective: High Level of Passenger Satisfaction
Passenger satisfaction surveys run by Transport Focus, the consumer organisation for transport
users in the UK, were paused after 2019 due to the Covid-19 pandemic. These surveys have been
restarted in 2023 and the results are shown in Table 1.
Prior to 2019, the percentage of passengers in the BSIP area who were fully satisfied (‘all satisfied’
in the survey) had been relatively stable, ranging between 84% and 89%. This dropped substantially
in 2023 with the reported level of overall satisfaction with bus journeys across the MCA and NSC
areas falling by 12% compared to 2015. However, this trend is reflective of that seen across England.
Both locally and nationally this is in large part related to widespread driver shortages and
reductions in commercial services. As outlined in section 3, we are making great progress against a
range of themes including an increase of over 300 drivers.
Table 1- Bus passenger satisfaction in the Bus Passenger Survey (up to 2019) and Your Bus
Journey survey run by Transport Focus.
Overall satisfaction 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2023
West of England + North Somerset 89% 85% 89% 85% 86% 77%
Metropolitan areas in England 86% 85% 85% 87% 87% 78%

2021 Objective: High quality bus service
Bus services in the area are provided by 18 operators, with the majority provided by First Bus.
Nearly 200 different services operate in the region, a mix between urban, inter-urban and rural
services.
Frequency and accessibility
Bus services in the BSIP area are focussed on radial corridors in the urban areas of Bristol, Bath,
and Weston- super-Mare. The figure below shows how service frequency is represented on a typical
Wednesday between the AM and PM peak times. There are clear high frequency radial corridors in
each urban area, with good frequency inter-urban corridors. This situation is however not consistent
throughout the day and throughout the week, as shown in Appendix B.
Most urban services in Bath and Bristol terminate in a central location and do not operate across
the city. While this can avoid transferring the impact of delays on one side of the route to the other
side of the route (were buses to cross the centre), it does lead to a less connected and convenient
network and is not yet aligned to BSIP objectives for cross centre radial routes. Frequency on orbital
services (where these operate) is much lower than those on radial services and has historically not
been prioritised. Inter-urban services operate at frequencies between 15 and 30 minutes but the
journey times are typically much longer than those achievable by car. Many market towns now have
15-minute frequency between 7am and 7pm to the West’s two cities. However, as elsewhere in the
country, the rural network is much more dispersed, and has lower service frequencies with less
coverage in the evenings and at weekends.

10
Figure 4 - Corridor frequency in the BSIP area

Journey times and Punctuality
Traffic is the biggest cause of delays. Punctuality and journey times were the third and fourth
areas reporting the lowest satisfaction across the region from the latest Your Bus Journey survey.
Engagement with operators also highlighted delays and punctuality issues as two of the biggest
blockers to more efficient running of services. Indeed, delays from local traffic have led to increases
in journey time of up to 13% year on year on some corridors.
Table 2 shows how punctuality in the region has varied over the last 5 years and is currently well
below other areas in England and indeed below the targets set in 2021.
Table 2 - Non-frequent bus services running on time by local authority
Area 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2021/22 2022/23
West of England + North Somerset 82% 77% NA NA 75%
Metropolitan areas in England 84% 84% 84% 87% 86%
Non-metropolitan areas in England 83% 83% 85% 85% 81%
England outside London 84% 84% 85% 84% 80%

Reliability
In addition to the points discussed above to do with punctuality, reliability is a key aspect of how
bus services are perceived by passengers. One of the main causes of service cancellations has been
driver shortages. This has hindered the ability of bus operators to run more services and to run
them reliably. As discussed in later sections, this continues to be addressed by the MCA and NSC.

11
Bus lanes
The twin problems of traffic congestion and poor bus journey times are being tackled by the
provision of bus priority infrastructure. The level of bus lane and other priority mileage excluding
High Occupancy Vehicle lanes in 2021 and 2024 is shown in Table 3 below.
Our BSIP includes an ambitious programme to further expand the provision of bus priority in the
region.
Table 3 – Miles of bus lane per local authority in 2021 and 2024
Local authority Miles of Bus Lane (2021) Miles of Bus Lane (2024)
Bath & North East Somerset 2.36 2.36
Bristol 21.19 21.19
South Gloucestershire 8.05 11.22
North Somerset 2.43 5.2
TOTAL 34.03 39.97

Investment and Spend
The MCA (via the transport levy provided by the highways authorities in the area) supports 32
bus services and NSC supports 13 non-commercial bus services. (see Appendix B). Over the last
financial year, the authorities spent around £5 million in financial support for local bus services,
excluding payments for concessionary travel.
WEST link is a form of demand responsive transport (DRT) service that has been developed through
the 2021 BSIP programme and introduced across the region with the primary purpose of linking
passengers to key transport corridors. It is a bookable service through either app or telephone-
based systems and is governed by a range of system rules that are regularly reviewed and adjusted
to maximise the potential for increased passenger use and connection to the public transport
network.
Commercial services have benefited from BSIP funding enhancements, aligned to our objective
of more turn up and go services in cities and 15 min frequency in market towns. The enhanced
services and the services which the commercial operators have enhanced, have to date seen strong
patronage growth, demonstrating how effective targeted funding can be at increasing the number of
passengers and in turn revenue.
The map below shows the coverage of the network between commercial and supported services.
Detailed maps, showing the relationship to key destinations, are included in Appendix B. Not all
commercial bus services operate all day, seven days a week. Much of the financial support provided
by the local transport authorities is directed at evening and Sunday services.

12
Figure 6 - Coverage of commercial and supported services in the BSIP area

Tables 4 and 5 outline the spend in the region, both capital and revenue and the funding sources that
have enabled this. More detail on spend to date is included in Section 3. Over the last two years BSIP
funding has played a key role in enabling effective investment across a range of improvements.
Key investment in bus priority measures could help tackle the journey time and punctuality issues
faced by the network.

13
How the bus network is supported
Table 4 - Expenditure on buses by West of England CA and North Somerset Council
Type Expenditure category 2022-23 2023-24
Revenue Supported services £5,497,030 £4,912,141
Revenue BSIP Enhanced Services and WESTlink £0 £9,756,724
Revenue Concessionary travel reimbursement £14,308,924 £14,550,050
Revenue Concessionary travel administration £14,616 £17,949
Revenue Fares support £1,785,000 £4,936,000
Revenue Bus stop maintenance £408,797 £423,794
Revenue Bus information £491,146 £640,562
Revenue Other £3,042,000 £4,710,771
Revenue Total Revenue Expenditure £25,547,513 £39,947,991
Capital Bus stop infrastructure £9,150,163 £7,017,066
Capital Bus priority measures £1,418,886 £5,774,413
Capital Other - £70,160
Capital Total Capital Expenditure £10,569,049 £12,861,639
Total Total Expenditure £36,116,562 £52,809,630

Table 5 - Sources of funding for expenditure on buses in the West of England
Source of funding 2022-23 2023-24
Local Government Finance Settlement £1,220,130 £1,407,694
Planning Obligations (s106) £832,590 £533,000
BSIP funding £3,746,049 £23,080,639
Covid Bus Service Grant / Bus Recovery Grant £131,572 £34,087
City Region Sustainable Transport Settlement £0 £6,700,000
Devolved BSOG £1,215,153 £1,215,153
Transforming Cities Fund £9,100,000 £0
Bus shelter advertising £4,000 £4,200
Other (including Transport Levy) £19,867,068 £19,834,857
Total £36,116,562 £52,809,630

14
2021 Objective: High quality waiting environment
There are nearly 6,000 bus stops in the region mostly owned by unitary councils and parish councils,
of which 1,183 have Real Time Information (RTI) and approximately 5,000 have printed timetables.
QR code information will be delivered over the next few months, as part of our BSIP ambitions,
allowing quicker instant access to a wider range of information.

2021 Objective: High vehicle standards
Currently, 98.4% of the fleet in the region was Euro VI standard or higher (including several
biomethane powered buses with very low emissions), showing good progress towards our
decarbonisation targets.
In March 2024 both the MCA and NSC were successful in attracting £6.6 million and £2.1 million
respectively of Government funding to support the introduction of 98 zero-emission electric buses
through the second Zero Emission Bus Regional Area (ZEBRA) programme. We will work with First
Bus to support the roll-out of these buses across the local bus network.
The funding awarded to each area will see 74 new electric buses operate in the MCA area and 24
buses launched in the NSC area (a rural area as defined by DfT). Government funding is providing
up to 25% of the purchase costs for the vehicles, with First Bus investing over £50 million to support
the purchase of these buses.

2021 Objective: High quality information
One of our core objectives remains to continually improve bus service information. This information
is available in a variety of media, both physical and online, as shown below. As noted above, most
bus stops have printed timetables and an increasing number have RTI, but this RTI needs to be fully
integrated with all operators’ systems.
TravelWEST was launched in 2012 to create a central information resource for all transport in the
BSIP area. The website brings together information on all travel options, as well as providing an
information resource for our wider transport network and the work that we do. The website provides
information on fixed services as well as WEST link; it can support journey planning across different
travel options and has information on travel updates, fares, and many others. We have an ambition
to overhaul and improve this website.
Figure 7 - Range of information sources available to passengers

Printed
Timetables
Real Time
Traveline Information
at Stops

On Bus
Information
TravelWEST

Operator iPoints
websites
and apps

15
2021 Objective: Low fares, simple ticketing, and easy means of payment
The region’s first ‘Tap On, Tap Off’ system was introduced in 2022 on all services operated by First
Bus, simplifying the use of buses for passengers. Tap On, Tap Off removes the need to buy a ticket
for each journey, guaranteeing passengers will not pay more than the day or week ticket price, and
will save more as weekly trips increase.
Our region also led the way on introducing a cap on single tickets at £2 for adults and £1 for children.
We have also introduced other ideas such as ‘Birthday Buses’ to encourage new passengers in line
with our key goal to increase patronage from fare paying passengers. Since its introduction in July
2023, the ‘Birthday Pass’ has led to over 850,000 journeys, with 47% of people who have benefitted
from Birthday Buses saying they used the bus instead of driving for the trip they were making.
There are currently four multi-operator bus products in the MCA and NSC area:
• AvonRider: B&NES, Bristol, South Gloucestershire, and North Somerset
• BathRider: Bath urban area
• BristolRider: Bristol urban area
• WestonRider: Weston-super-Mare urban area.
These tickets give bus passengers greater flexibility to plan and make journeys than single-operator
tickets.
The current multi-modal offer across the region is limited to PlusBus, a national scheme, and the
Freedom Travelpass. PlusBus is an add-on to single and return train tickets as well as season
tickets, which offer unlimited bus and rail travel around the region. There are Bristol, Bath, and
Weston-super-Mare tickets.
The Freedom Travelpass provides unlimited travel on all train and most bus services in the four
zones covering the region as set out in Appendix B. However, a photocard is required for the monthly
Freedom Travelpass, and it can only be purchased from local railway and bus station booking offices,
which provide additional barriers to passengers.

16
Summary
Operators and passengers are navigating a difficult environment of rising costs, changing travel
patterns, and increased operational difficulties due to traffic levels and driver shortages. Year on
year passenger growth of 20% since the pandemic reflects the investment being put in.
The table below summarises the current situation against the objectives set in our 2021 BSIP.
Objective Commentary
High mode share for buses of the The pandemic has dramatically changed travel patterns,
overall travel market but our region is seeing a steady increase in year-on-year
passenger numbers.
High level of passenger In line with trends elsewhere in the country, passenger
satisfaction satisfaction has decreased in the context of the challenges
faced by the sector since the pandemic. Our proposals in the
following sections look to address this across all stages of the
passenger journey.
High quality bus services The current network has strong radial frequencies in the main
urban centres with a more dispersed rural network and the
WEST link service, providing transport for people to access
the core bus network. Punctuality and reliability continue to be
obstacles to efficient operation but continued investment in bus
priority infrastructure looks to address this. BSIP enhanced
services are proving successful at generating patronage
growth.
High quality waiting environment An increased number of the 6,000 stops in the region have
printed timetables and RTI information, which will be further
improved by the rollout of QR information at stops.
High vehicle standards Whilst the average fleet age across the region remains around
9.4 years, the use of new buses has been steadily increasing
across our network. These have been a mix of Euro VI and
very low emission (biomethane) buses and will soon be
supplemented by 98 new electric buses (74 in the MCA area
and 24 in the NSC area) which have been secured through
funding from the second DfT ZEBRA programme.
High quality information TravelWEST provides a consolidated point of information for
travel in the region as well as strong trip planning capabilities.
This is alongside a range of other physical and on-line
information.
Low fares, simple ticketing, and The range of ticketing options in the region has been simplified
easy means of payment by the introduction of Tap On / Tap Off of all First Bus services.
Our fare packages outlined in the following sections are
contributing to growing passenger numbers and making buses
more affordable and simpler to use.

17
Section Three
Improvement
Programme to 2025
18
First steps to improve our buses…
We have worked across all areas of the local bus network to improve services for local passengers.
Since receiving our BSIP award in 2022 we have delivered significant improvements to our buses.

Turn up and go frequencies and 15 minutes
frequencies on key routes…
We have added more buses to 19 core bus services across
the region, increasing frequency and adding new routes –
£5m+
Bus service
investing over £5 million already and up to a further £10
‘Kickstart’
million over the next 2-years.
investment
Simpler bus fares
It now only costs no more than £2 each time you travel
across our region by bus following the introduction of a
regional and national fare cap – and our young people now
£2
Regional fare cap on all
travel for £1.
our buses
150,000+ WEST link journeys
Linking up passengers in more remote areas to the bus and …and job
train network across our region.
seekers go
More information free…
Over 300 new information screens including 200 e-paper
displays at bus stops using over £1.5 million of investment in
digital information on our network will be in place by March
2025.

Getting buses through the traffic
Investing a BSIP allocation of up to £45m alongside CRSTS
budget of £540m to add more bus lanes and other bus priority Making
schemes to allow them to run faster across our region.
buses
Encouraging new passengers reliable
By adding more bus lanes
Birthday Buses has been used by over 65,000 people making
and ways to allow our
more than 850,000 bus trips. 47% of residents who have
buses to run faster across
benefitted from Birthday Buses say they used the bus instead
our region.
of driving - helping to create long term behaviour change.

300+ more bus drivers
Everything is underpinned by having more bus drivers which
is why we have invested in training and recruitments drives
through Drive and Thrive.

19
Introduction
The West of England region was awarded £105.4 million in BSIP funding to be spent across a three-
year period between 2022/23 to 2024/25.
This funding was divided between two streams, £57.5 million in revenue and £48 million in capital
funding, the second highest award in England. The revenue fund was joint across both the MCA and
NSC areas, and the capital funding allocation was provided to NSC.
The MCA also benefitted from capital investment through the West of England’s CRSTS allocation
(c£406 million total), of which c£89.7 million was assigned to be invested into bus priority schemes.
The BSIP funding allocation to 2025 is presented in Table 3-1 below, which breaks down the revenue
funding and capital funding allocations by the MCA and NSC areas, and by each Delivery Plan.
Further detail on the Delivery Plans is available in Appendix C.
The table compares the allocated budget spend for each of the Delivery Plans against the percentage
of budget already exhausted by March 2024. The status of each workstream is indicated based on
a RAG classification (Red, Amber, Green), which highlights the progress towards completing the
allocated spend by March 2025. This is further explained below.

Progress by March 2024
Since the initial programme was set out in the 2021 BSIP (Appendix C), we have worked closely
with the DfT to deliver our allocation flexibly, and where advantageous we have moved and adjusted
funding around to maximise the delivery of our schemes. Table 3-1 shows we have made good
progress with projects under our delivery plans, with most on track. For instance, our Bus Driver
Recruitment and Retention project (under Skills Training) was completed in April 2024. We are also
halfway through our Fares Packages 1 and 2, with Package 3 due to start in the summer of 2024.
Workstreams on track to complete allocated spend within the BSIP funding envelope have been
classified as Green under the progress RAG rating.
However, workstream programmes which are expected to be extended outside of the BSIP funding
envelope have been classified as Amber under the progress RAG rating. Workstreams under
Intensive Services (such as Service Support) and Single Integrated System (WEST link) will have
their programme extended into 2026 following agreement with the DfT.
The delivery programme of workstreams under each Delivery Plan is presented in Table 3-2 below.
Further detail and progress commentary for each of the Delivery Plans is available in Appendix C of
this document. The spending allocation remains flexible and is likely to be adjusted continually until
March 2025 and detail on the exact spend for each Delivery Plan has not been included.

20
Table 3-1 – Allocation of funding from the 2022 BSIP update
Delivery Plans BSIP Funding Allocation to 2025 Spend to March 2024 March 2025
and Beyond
ID Description Total BSIP Total BSIP % of Total % Complete Progress RAG Targeted
Revenue Capital Combined Completion
Budget Budget (NSC) BSIP Date
(NSC & MCA) Allocation
A Intensive Services £13,338,667 - 13% 38% Amber March 2026
B Bus priority - £35,830,000 34% 20% Amber Sept 2025
C Fares £14,619,338 - 14% 45% Green March 2025
D Integrated ticketing £110,000 £70,000 0.2% 39% Green March 2025
E Integrated services - £12,083,000 11% 3% Amber Sept 2025
F Single integrated system £5,310,233 - 5% 7% Green March 2025
G Modern buses No BSIP Funding – Achieved with Bus Operators through EP Green Ongoing
H Passenger voice £80,000 - 0.1% 25% Green March 2025
I Non-intensive services £18,987,799 - 18% 25% Amber March 2026
J Long-term Green March 2035+
- Delivery (EP & Consultancy) £4,568,752 - 4% 43% Green March 2025
- Skills Training (drivers / engineers) £190,710 - 0.2% 100% Green Completed
- Monitoring and Evaluation £300,000 - 0.3% 8% Green March 2026
- Total £57,505,499 £47,983,000 100% 35% Green (As Above)

21
Table 3-2 – Programme for workstreams under each Delivery Plan, 2021/22 to March 2025 and beyond
ID Delivery Plan 2021/22 2022-23 2023-24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28 2028/29 2029-35
A Intensive Services
A1 High Frequency, Accessible Network
B Bus Priority
B1 Bus Priority (NSC)
C Fares
C1 Package 1 – Fare Capping, Reductions, Discounts
C2 Package 2 – Birthday Bus, Care Leavers, Job Seekers
C3 Package 3 – Targeted Offers
D Integrated ticketing
D1 Multi-Operating Ticketing Support & Integration
E Integrated Services
E1 Integrated Services (NSC)
F Single integrated system
F1 Brand Identity (Single Network)
F2 Programme Marketing and Communications
F3 Travel Guides and Journey Planning
F4 Within Journey Information
H Passenger Voice
H1 Passenger Charter
H2 Bus Passenger Safety Audit
I Non-intensive services
I1 DRT (currently WEST link) to complement network
I2 Additional BSIP Supported Services
I3 WEST Local Community Initiative
I4 AssessWEST – Network Re-design Programme
Additional
Delivery (All aspects of support to programme)
Skills Training (drivers / engineers)

22
Bus Driver Recruitment
Successful bus driver recruitment and retention is crucial to running a reliable bus network, while
understanding and addressing staff shortages across all roles in the bus market for the longer-term
is fundamental to achieving a better and more trusted service for passengers.

Drive and Thrive
To recruit and retain more drivers a range of strategies have been employed working in partnership
with local bus operators to reduce vacancy rates.
Reimagining the career
To attract new people into the career we spread the message that bus drivers are community heroes
who get people to work, school or the shops every day.

Local Partnerships
We worked closely with community groups at workshops and careers fairs to educate and spread
awareness of the roles and responsibilities bus drivers have and encourage individuals to join the
profession. First Bus worked with Bath Spa University to encourage students to become bus drivers
while studying. Stagecoach has worked with Ukrainian refugees.
Skills Connect - Digital Platform
We created digital adverts with links to wider training platforms through our partnership with Skills
Connect. The series of videos presented a positive view of the bus market from existing employees
who promoted the benefits of working in the industry.

Don’t just wait for the bus - drive it!
Printed advertisements at bus stops, on buses, on billboards and in the local press. Campaign
adverts boldly highlighted key messages to engage viewers, focussing on the message that bus
drivers are community heroes while highlighting expected salary, and opportunities for flexible
working and training.

Better work
The largest operator First Bus has become a Living Wage Employer and continue to engage
positively with trade union colleagues. Bus Operators have been encouraged to engage with, and
sign up to, the West of England Good Employment Charter so that they can access resources and
support to improve their practises, plus benefit from the marketing activity around the West of
England Good Employment Charter.

Training
In an innovative approach to funding, we have been able to fund bus driver training through the
Mayoral Priority Skills Fund. A flexible funding stream was utilised to enable training for 50+ bus
drivers in the region, with interviews offered upfront from local bus operators, increasing likelihood
of a job after successful training.

23
Women drive too …
Through the campaign, First Bus recruited more women drivers to address gender imbalances
across their depots, with campaign messaging partly focusing on women.

2025 and beyond

We need continued work to recruit and retain drivers. This is important following the
broader diversity of entrants into the sector. In partnership with our bus operators and
other bodies such as the Department for Work and Pensions, we will seek to deliver:
Tailored support – flexible hours, pay, diversity & inclusion.
Community engagement – to make bus driving a more attractive career.
Unlocking future talent - Engage with schools to inspire careers in bus driving, inspiring
the next generation.
Safety and Facilities – improve facilities for staff, such as diversity training and toilets
Support and Training – car driver license training prior to bus driving, childcare
provision, English language training
Standardised training - across all our operators Sustainability – green skills training for
all operator staff.
Pride in our drivers - celebrate our drivers and encourage everyone to be respectful
through marketing campaigns, create a culture of pride in WEST.
Sustainability – green skills training for all operator staff.
Marketing campaign - improve attitudes towards drivers.

24
Section Four
Ambitions and Proposals
for 2025 to 2035 and beyond

25
Service Level and Network Coverage
Our Ambition
We want to achieve a balanced and financially sustainable regional bus network - ensuring more
people can live without need of a private car in our denser areas and providing more access to
the public transport network regardless of geography and ability in our lower density areas,
which will help towards our climate ambitions.

Challenges and Opportunities
We have a diverse geography which creates challenges in delivering an efficient, equitable, and viable
local bus service network. We also continue to face the dual headwinds of increasing congestion and
continued staff vacancy gaps in all job roles across the bus operator market - combining to reduce
regional bus speeds by up to 13% (2022 and 2023) due to these issues.
We have made a good start in addressing these challenges, delivering c£15 million of our allocated
budget in areas such as bus service frequency, reliability, punctuality, staff retention, (seeing
successful recruitment of over 300 new bus drivers and improved punctuality and reliability through
the EP) and the roll-out of WEST link DRT, a regional service designed to link people to core public
transport options.
Total bus passenger journeys across the network have grown by 20% since 2021/22, with the highest
growth occurring on commercial services which were further enhanced with BSIP funding, such as the
X1 and X4 interurban routes. Due to the stability that BSIP funding has provided across the network,
First Bus are setting new stretch standards for the important ‘8’ bus service in Bristol and have
already coordinated services to a much more consistent standard along the Gloucester Road corridor.
But the work needs to continue to better connect our local and regional communities. Advancing our
plans for a revised regional network is a key opportunity to reshape how buses work for local people.

Our Approach
To rebalance the regional bus network and develop a comprehensive and connected public transport
offer across the West of England, we have embarked on a programme of work – AssessWEST .
AssessWEST , is a long-term piece of work which spells out an ambition for a more comprehensive and
more connected transport offer. Whilst some of the outputs may not be achievable under current financial
constraints, it will also set out a longer-term aspiration for the region which will inform future decision
making on bus services and infrastructure, and the way we plan and manage bus services through the
current EP process or through a franchised model.
A key output of AssessWEST is to describe how the network should be developed in the longer-term
to deliver more sustainable services at higher frequencies that focus on cross-centre radial routes
connecting with new orbital style services at key interchange points (hubs) (as outlined in the West of
England Bus Strategy) and to set foundations for change in the short-term. This will not only be bus
to bus, but also bus to rail with the network focusing on transport integration at existing planned rail
stations and ensuring bus services run every 30-minutes or less and connect to important rail services.
Whilst we do not currently directly control the planning and delivery of buses in our region, AssessWEST
could allow BSIP partners to align their investment decision with different models of bus network
administration and delivery. This allows the West of England to be flexible in its future stewardship of the
region’s bus network, making use of any new approaches that may come forward at a national level.

26
Our Short-Term Proposals
To give us the foundations to build our longer-term plans for a more sustainable network we will:
• Continuously review the current bus network and make changes to encourage new passengers
onto our buses, working hard to then retain them through better fares and services.
• Steer commercial bus services changes to agreed AssessWEST outcomes so that the foundations
could start to be laid for a longer-term improved regional bus network that also has a focus on rail
integration.
• Continue to nurture growth of our core bus network, by seeking ways to make services more
frequent and so more convenient for passengers. If future funding is received, it will continue to be
used to enhance services to stretch standards for 15-minute, turn-up-and-go, frequencies.
• Match frequencies of important connecting services to those on the commercial bus network -
encouraging a change of bus outside of the city centre to make suburban journeys.
• Explore regional night bus services, and pilot micro-networks using a mix of bus and DRT (such
as WEST link) focused on major transport interchanges to understand how a mixed approach to
service provision can improve travel options for longer periods of the day.
• Develop specific location-based package improvements that focus on making travel easier between
towns and cities across our region.
• Adopt an approach where each town bus service operates with four buses each hour, fostering
better connections to longer-distance regional services.
• Recognise the continued need for a supported bus service network and work to solve the problems
people face in areas with little or no public transport. Consider how DRT may be a tool for this, by
mixing fully flexible, semi-timetabled and normal timetabled services.
• Continue to align our approaches with CRSTS programmes up to 2027 and beyond, the emerging
JLTP5, spatial development, rural strategies, and our West of England Bus Strategy.
• Work with Unitary Authorities to embed buses into development planning policy to strengthen
the link to public transport policy, making buses the primary travel option considered from first
occupation by residents either through DRT or the protection of any bus corridor where significant
planning is proposed within the next ten years – ensuring buses remain in place to be provide
capacity from first occupation.
• Continue to work through the EP to continually review the local bus network, providing a
structured approach to supported service funding and promoting the further development of
innovative ways to reduce transport poverty through, but not limited to, DRT and WEST local style
initiatives originating from the community or local bus operators.

With over 60% of the region is designated as rural, and smaller numbers of people living across
wider areas, we know that it is important to provide different public transport options.
Our supported bus network remains important to us, but it needs to be more sustainable. Reshaping
the rural network into more direct links to regional centres or interchanges and using DRT (e.g.
WEST link) or other community vehicles as either a fully flexible, semi-flexible, or fixed service at
different times of the day will help us to unlock demand that will have an important contribution to
making both our commercial and supported networks financially stable.

27
Our Longer-Term Ambition
Our longer-term ambition is to develop options for our local bus network through AssessWEST .
These will be aligned with the region’s JLTP and the CRSTS programme. The focus of our longer-
term ambition to 2035 will be across two theme areas:

More buses that are easier to use
The AssessWEST programme will help to define our stretch standards. These will be based on area
classification by population levels, and route type. We have defined typical areas and have separated
single defined urban areas beyond Bristol and Bath from conurbations such as our two cities and
have defined four route types. Potential stretch standards are below - as area populations grow so
bus provision increases, strengthening the development planning relationship.
Population Radial Route Orbital Route Inter-Urban Inner-Circular
Conurbations 6-12 buses / hour 4-6 buses / hour 6-12 buses / hour
Over 70,000 (single or coordinated) 0600-2300 0500-2359
0500-2359 Daily Daily
Daily
Urban areas 6 buses / hour 6 buses / hour 4 buses / hour 4 buses / hour
Over 70,000 0500-2359 0500-2359 0600-2300 0700-2200
Daily Daily Daily Daily
Urban areas 4 buses / hour 4 buses / hour 4 buses / hour 3 buses / hour
20,001 – 0600-2300 0600-2300 0600-2200 0700-2100
70,000 Daily Daily Daily Mon-Sat*
Urban areas 3-4 buses / hour N/A 3-4 buses / hour N/A
10,001 – 0700-2230 0600-2100
20,000 Daily Daily
Rural areas 2-3 buses / hour N/A 2-3 buses / hour N/A
3,001 – 10,000 0700-2230 0600-2100
Mon-Sat* Mon-Sat*
Rural areas 1-2 buses / hour N/A 1-2 buses / hour N/A
501 – 3,000 0700-2230 0600-2100
Mon-Sat* Mon-Sat*
Less than 500 Provision of DRT to Transport Hubs for small rural areas with less than 500 people
Note: * Sunday operation remains an option decided on a case-by-case basis

28
A more sustainable network
We will continue to work towards a more sustainable bus network that is convenient and stable
- building trust, pride, and loyalty in buses across our region’s population. Through this we will
continue to work hard to develop a stronger link between regional planning policy and the role of
public transport.
Our approach includes:
• A more sustainable connected core network. We expect many routes will need continued financial
support to operate at higher frequencies.
• Further development of innovative and demand led transport options and explore making public
transport available from first occupation in new developments.
• Where we have areas of significant residential and industrial development, we will seek to deliver
high-quality bus infrastructure so we can deliver segregated ‘metrobus style’ service performance,
such as that now being delivered at the YTL Brabazon development to the north of Bristol.
• The safeguarding of bus routes aligned to our 10-year development plan (linked to our JLTP);
continuing work already started under our short-term proposals – see [Appendix D].
• Funding sources remain aligned to deliver the greater benefits of combined infrastructure and
operational improvements (e.g. BSIP, CRSTS, s106 working in tandem).

29
Bus Priority
Our Ambition
Delivering more reliable services across our region by tackling congestion and installing the
right priority measures for the right locations - ensuring more buses operate on-time and as
advertised, maximising the opportunity for buses to be sustainable.

Challenges and Opportunities
Across our network our largest operator has reported that bus journey times across the region
are 13% slower (2022 to 2023) due to a combination of congestion and shortages in operational
resources – impacting our target for 2025 to reduce average bus journey times by 2%. We are now
seeing up to two in five bus services falling below the punctuality threshold of 82%, with punctuality
and journey times identified as the two main areas for improvement by our passengers.
We know that bus priority has a transformative effect on buses. The metrobus system uses
significant priority measures and has seen passenger growth of 30% since its introduction in 2019,
and lower journey times.
However, there are significant challenges - single carriageway roads make bus lanes difficult and
fragmented to install; delays impact lower frequency services and their passengers in our rural areas
more significantly than bunching of very high frequency buses on urban corridors; and resolving local
issues with simple measures can still evoke strong feelings amongst our communities.

Our Approach
We will continue to target BSIP (and CRSTS) investment on areas across our core network to
improve reliability and a work towards a financially sustainable network. Our EP will support this
and ensure that capital investment delivers public benefits in improved services.
Consistent reliability and frequency of bus services is a key driver of growth, and the implementation
of appropriate and simple priority measures is an important factor in generating trust in the bus
network. There are significant opportunities to reduce bus delays in lower density areas which
potentially have as big, or bigger, impact than in urban areas and are often cheaper to achieve using
simple and cost-effective options (e.g. removing parking at highway pinch-points).
To ensure the effectiveness of bus priority measures we will use data to track the performance of
buses across the network (monitoring average bus speeds, delays, and time between bus stops).
We will report against past and expected performance, apply enforcement measures through
mechanisms open to us in the EP (as the local transport authority in each of the MCA and NSC areas
and alongside the Traffic Commissioner) and identify new bus priority opportunities by analysing
delay ’hot spots’.
We will encourage Highway Authorities to apply stronger enforcement measures, including camera-
based enforcement and towaway provision to remove delays caused by illegal parking and other
obstructions on our bus network.
Through our existing EP, we have confirmed the use of an Operational Expenditure (OpEx)
mechanism to capture and reinvest monetised operational savings seen by each bus operator where
bus priorities result in vehicle and driver resource savings. This approach will directly benefit bus
passengers through better bus services and a denser bus route network. This will grow bus use and
attract new passengers, generating additional revenue to create a virtuous cycle.

30
INFOGRAPHICS

Our Short-Term Proposals

30% We will create the foundations for a more reliable bus network in
the future and build on our success in linking capital and revenue
Growth created funding streams to seek a more sustainable bus network.
by metrobus

To do this our general principles and policies will focus on:
• Continued driver recruitment and retention.
• An ongoing programme set up to understand simple, ‘quick wins’ and low-cost priority measures.
• A data led approach to target hot spots – applying the right measure for the right time and location.

These help us to use the following building blocks for a reliable regional bus network:

Ongoing BSIP and Signal priority, bus gates
CRSTS funded schemes and yellow box junctions
to 2027 and beyond. on more bus corridors.

Agreed relationship Bus lane and parking
between cost and enforcement – more
impact. staff and resources.

Better integration of More metrobus style Design-in priorities to
highway network assets priorities and bus lanes new developments and
with bus corridors. on strategic A-roads. improve JLTP approach.

...building to...

Our Longer-Term Ambitions
Building on the foundations laid in the short-term between 2025/26
and 2028/29 we will focus on our target to achieve at least 95%
punctuality across our bus network by 2030. In the longer-term we
95%
Buses on time
will seek to implement infrastructure as set out below. by 2030

31
Ambition Category Ambition Details
More continuous bus lanes and More continuous bus lanes where congestion persists and
network integration space allows, on routes where there are six or more buses
per hour and continued integration of existing bus lanes with
parallel infrastructure schemes to form a more complete
network.
Future4WEST There are four corridors identified where the possibility of fully
(or almost fully) segregated routes should be considered:
• Bath to Bristol City Centre
• South Fringe to Bristol City Centre
• East Fringe to Bristol City Centre
• North Fringe to Bristol City Centre
Service enhancements Develop a wider programme to improve bus journey speeds
and tackle traffic congestion after 2028.
Wider policies A review of the management and pricing policies for parking
provisions in regional centres to consider how policy change
may attract more people onto buses whilst keeping our
regional centres accessible to everyone and commercially
vibrant.

32
Simpler and More Affordable Fares
Our Ambition
We want fares that give better value and support a better experience for bus passengers across
the region.

Challenges and Opportunities
Meeting our ambition is challenging in the current environment as the bus industry continues to face
significant headwinds linked to rising operational costs and staff retention. This can lead to higher
fares as operators seek to meet these costs. Declining passenger use can make the situation worse
and lead to services being curtailed or cancelled to reduce costs further.
To meet these challenges, we introduced reduced fares in October 2022 which was augmented by
a national cap of £2 from January 2023. This has been important in terms of passenger growth and
confidence in using buses and has provided a significant opportunity to capture new bus users.
However, uncertainly remains over the future with the national fare cap currently due to end in
December 2024 and our own subsidies that end in March 2025. There is a big risk of a return to the
downward spiral of higher fares leading to reduced ridership leading to reduced services unless
further action is taken to lower fares in the longer-term.
A blunt fare cap has the benefit of simplicity. However, it prioritises passengers purchasing a single
fare and does not specifically target return fares or groups (e.g. families). It also particularly benefits
those making longer journeys as they receive a proportionally larger discount – when compared to
distances travelled which may be unsustainable in the long-term and create difficult financial cliff-
edges in the future.

Our Approach
Our approach acknowledges that simpler and more affordable fares are more than just a tool for
increasing bus patronage but are also an investment, not just in transport but also in town centres,
social inclusion, and a greener future.
We have combined the benefits of fare capping and technology, allowing us to have a daily fare cap
set to £6 across the Bristol and Bath fare zones where many of our passengers make multiple short-
distance bus trips and where passengers use ‘tap-on / tap-off’(TOTO) facilities. Across the wider
region we have introduced a £7 daily fare cap and we have also trialled differing daily fare caps in
localised areas, for example a £3.70 cap in the Weston-super-Mare fare zone. Importantly, whilst
technology has made this more attractive for many of our users, these fare caps are also available to
passengers using the TravelWEST card and cash fares, with our drivers helping passengers to use
the right fares when cash is used. However, one challenge remains – where a passenger uses two
different commercial operator services the current fare capping approach does not apply, leaving
the passenger paying a higher combined fare for their trip – we will seek to resolve this in the short-
term.
We have used the fare cap approach as a stimulus for our wider BSIP fare strategies to allow some
passengers and passenger groups to make further savings (e.g. through our EP we mandate £1
fares for young people aged up to 15-years old) and have a range of promotional fare offers that are
made even easier when combined with TOTO use.

33
Our Short-Term Proposals
Our approach to simplifying and lowering the fares across our region has made a significant impact
on how people travel by bus.

Special Promotional
We will continue to work towards Fares to drive growth
a maintaining a sustainable and
simple fare structure. We will continue targeted
offers following the success
of earlier offers such as the Birthday Buses
offer following its successful launch and
take-up by over 65,000 people. We will extend
Retain a regional our Job Seekers offer to include those on Job
Seekers Allowance and we will expand the
Fare Cap fare product range on our TravelWEST Card
and increase regional top-up facilities.

Young Person Regional Zoning
Fares We want to achieve geographic consistency and periods of
availability across our fare products. Existing fare zones
Free travel up to focus on urban centres with all non-urban areas grouped
11-years old and into wider and inconsistent regional zones.
working towards a
new young person To provide the simplest and most equitable fares across
fares package across the West of England the region will be divided into smaller
our region – making areas with a single fare structure balancing fare and
bus travel simple, distance travelled where we cannot maintain a fare cap.
affordable,
and better
than the car. Group Travel Offers
We recognise that a regional fare
cap for single trip travel is not a
one-size fits all approach, so in
Promotional Fares addition to our fare cap proposals including
affordable ‘Tap-on / Tap-off’ daily caps, we will
Initiatives will be targeted at encouraging
seek to introduce more ticket bundle offers
new passenger growth and to get more
aimed at families and other travelling groups so
people using buses instead of their car.
that everyone gets the best value fare for their
journey across our region.

Increase cross-ticketing Care Leavers
between bus and rail
across the region We will continue ensuring we focus travel
(linked to better bus/rail incentives on important groups across our
timetable coordination). communities such as our Care Leavers.

34
Our Longer-Term Ambitions
Our longer-term ambition to 2034/35 builds on the foundations laid between 2025/26 and 2028/29
to maintain simple and affordable regional bus fares. In the longer-term we will seek to implement
the following strategies.
Ambition Category Ambition Details
Continuation of a regional fare The national fare cap providing £2 single journey travel
cap with the opportunity to cap daily travel when linked to TOTO
systems is critical to the long-term health of our bus network.
We would like to see the existing policy remain in place for as
long as possible but will also take steps to ensure increases
are fairly managed. In this event we will work closely with
operators to manage a transition that balances financially
sustainable fares levels with the passenger growth and shift
away from private car use trajectory that we are achieving.
Consideration of reduced travel We would welcome the opportunity to work with Government
for young people to develop a more comprehensive national nationally funded
approach to providing lower travel costs by bus for young
people of various age groups – providing benefits most
applicable to their use of the public transport network.
Additional fare promotions and We want to maintain a regional flat fare for single travel and
target groups align this to ongoing reductions for target groups, in particular
job seekers, care leavers and new groups such as veterans
and people leaving prison. In the longer-term we would seek
to build on the success of our 2021 BSIP and 2024 short-term
proposals and provide a range of targeted fare schemes that,
when used in combination with our headline ambitions above
and supported by a digital ticketing system, will provide
everyone with the lowest and best bus fare option each time
they travel, whether alone or as a group.

35
Ticketing
Our Ambition
We want to provide a consistent ticketing offer to passengers using the WEST network which
seeks to achieve a seamless, integrated approach between all our bus operators and across our
different forms of public transport.

Challenges and Opportunities
The growth in use of smart phones and contactless payment has transformed fare collection on local
bus networks. This presents a significant opportunity to make fares simpler and through our EP we
have already ensured regionally that all local bus operators are able to accept cashless payment.
Our largest local bus operator with 90% of the market records 67% of ticket sales by app but there
is no consistent ticket available electronically across all our operators. Less than 1% of journeys are
made using tickets accepted by all operators, compared to over 10% in other parts of the country.
Smaller operators who are not able to invest in smart ticketing technology continue to use cash and
paper-based products instead of apps and QR codes.
The opportunity here is the creation of a single offer to passengers across the region with
contactless Pay-As-You-Go and digital (smartphone) ticketing and development of the TravelWEST
Card to allow all ticket products to be housed in one location, the best fare to be applied to the
journey made, and a comprehensive and attractive offer for target groups including commuters and
young travellers.

Our Approach
We have set out three initiatives to support journey planning and ticketing on buses and all other
forms of public transport. The first two initiatives are being realised through the development of
the WEST app. The app seeks to provide a door-to-door, journey planning service that will bring
all information about forms of public transport into one place. It will seek to further integrate and
digitise ticketing for First Bus services, with the aim of extending this to all other bus operators,
and then rail. The WEST app will support the continued approach to digitalise public transport fare
payments and ticketing across our region with buses being at the start of this process.
Our approach is to continue to develop fares to make bus travel more accessible and convenient
for residents across the West of England Mayoral Combined Authority and North Somerset Council
areas.
Our approach also benefits from the introduction of the national fare cap and use of the TravelWEST
Card which have ensured that passengers without access to the WEST app benefit from low fares
and fare product options through various methods. However, the current lack of a single platform
(such as WEST app) and widespread availability of supporting technology continues to hamper
progress in this area where we know strong potential exists with First Bus alone stating that 40% of
adult passengers now use TOTO and 67% of tickets are sold digitally.

36
Our Short-Term Proposals
We will seek to develop the WESTapp to allow journey planning and ticketing to be in one place and
will integrate the WESTapp with DfT’s Project Coral once this is rolled out nationally.

We will work with the
DfT to deliver bus to bus
ticketing through Project
Coral – the system that
will allow fare payments
for trips across different
buses to be paid to the
right bus operators.

We will explore adding WESTlink
services and our regional ‘Rider’ tickets
to the WESTapp to make bus to bus
travel much easier across the region.

We will seek continued
funding to develop the We will seek to bring all forms of public
WESTapp through future transport into the WESTapp to allow
funding opportunities people to make journeys using different
and this will help us transport methods as part of one door to
to develop full rail door trip.
integration.

Our Longer-Term Ambitions
Beyond 2028/29 our long-term vision remains for a seamless and simple ticketing system that
allows more people across our region to benefit from cashless technology systems on all forms of
public transport.
We will continue to explore how we may develop the WESTapp and TravelWEST products, expand
facilities for people who are not able to use or access WESTapp to ensure an equitable ticketing
offer, and fully integrate parallel approaches such as Project Coral to ensure that all our public
transport providers can offer the lowest fare and the simplest ticket product range to the benefit of
everyone living in, working in, and visiting our region.

37
Improved Bus Stops, Bus Stations, and
Interchanges
Feedback shows that bus stop and waiting facilities need to be improved in terms of cleanliness,
safety, and information provision. It is also important to consider how different places have different
needs. For example, in rural areas where services tend to be less frequent, the time spent at the bus
stop is likely to be longer and so facilities such as RTI and seating are more heavily relied upon.
There is opportunity to improve passenger confidence and comfort through better physical
infrastructure and the availability of information - building a consistent bus stop, station and
interchange offer across the region, whilst ensuring that information is tailored and bespoke to the
needs of communities.

Our Short-Term Proposals
Waiting for buses
We will use our Bus Stop Guidance document to set a consistent standard across all bus stops in
the region but remain sensitive to rural and historical bus stop locations. We will review our current
maintenance arrangements for bus stops and shelters and look to move to a regional approach to
owning and managing our bus stops. We will consider access to bus stops by other forms of shared
and sustainable transport, the provision of cycle parking, and wayfinding to aid pedestrians following
our significant success in delivering micromobility schemes (e.g. e-scooters) and improve their
integration with buses further to improve first and last mile movements.
Roadworks Coordination
We will work towards making it a requirement that all road works are submitted to and reflected
within the disruptions management tool that has been developed since the previous BSIP, with
disruptions being communicated to passengers.
Changing buses
The places for people to change between transport forms will create a single network approach. We
will enhance the waiting environment for passengers with information that is easy to understand
and access and with better wayfinding piloting a combined approach of infrastructure and
information improvements on selected routes. Trained staff at principal interchanges will provide
help to users on services that are available to them. We will continue to deliver both smaller rural
and major interchanges and Park & Ride sites. We will provide opportunities for connections to be
made via WEST bike and WEST scoot. reflecting the goals set by the region for walking and cycling to
become the preferred choice for short journeys.
Connections to other transport
The facilities to allow passengers to change between buses and other transport will increase
provision of cycle parking and connect to off-road segregated walking and cycling routes to make
walking, wheeling, and cycling more attractive, and a viable onward option after the use of the bus
network. These plans build on the aspirations within our Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure
Plan and will improve network access for all these forms, including micromobility options.

38
Our Longer-Term Ambitions
• We will review the location of all bus stops and work with local people to move some to more
appropriate places, closer to homes and amenities, to better serve our communities.
• We want more bus stops in our region to have a branded flag, shelter, and good pedestrian access,
to be well-lit, monitored by CCTV if appropriate, and give information to passengers using RTI or
e-ink options.
• Interchange Hubs will be in urban areas where key radial and orbital bus services intersect and on
inter-urban corridors where rural feeder/DRT services connect - each informed by WEST app data.

Improved bus information and network identity
The mix of geographies across our region can mean that it is challenging to provide real-time bus
information due to issues with localised power connections and mobile technology signal strength.
Printed information is also a challenge due to the spread of our c6,000 bus stops. As we develop a
single unified network, all information will adopt the WEST brand - this will take time to roll-out at
all bus stops.
In the meantime, TravelWEST has already been upgraded to deliver real time information including
live location data and following a successful trial of e-paper displays, we are in a good position
to roll these out widely. The WEST brand is strong and is being introduced on WEST link and our
promotional fares.

Our Short-Term Proposals
WEST branding – one network
We will seek to extend the WEST brand across our network to fully brand our buses as WEST bus.
Initially, this will focus on buses placed on frequent and highly used bus corridors which could
benefit from strong brand recognition and the unified travel experience that this could encompass.
Through our EP, every bus will have WEST bus branding as a minimum on the front, side, rear,
and internally on the driver cab door so all our operators can maintain their own locally significant
branding whilst providing the single WEST bus network identity.
We will seek to update all bus stops with WEST bus branding and look to name bus stops
consistently across operator information as reflected in the National Public Transport Access Nodes
(NaPTAN). We also work hard to maintain the value and character of historical bus stops within the
WEST brand approach.
We will also seek to ensure consistency of predictions between apps and websites such as
TravelWEST and the WEST app, through a single data source and prediction approach.
We will work towards ensuring all bus stops get new route maps, walking maps, flags, and
information on the local area in WEST bus branding and that train stations will display WEST bus
information on digital displays.
We will seek the ability to place e-paper displays across half of our bus stops to provide up to date
timetables, real-time passenger notices, fare information, and promotional offers.

39
We will explore further development of the WEST app to include:
• Fares information for local buses
• Direct marketing, including tailored push notifications
• Ticket sales, with an enhanced TravelWEST Card
• Online chat function
We will seek to create new interactive travel guides to support journey planning, alongside local
area guides digitally and in printed format. We are working with local highway authorities to adopt
and implement a Bus Information Strategy by 2025.
These proposals will ensure we have an integrated travel brand that becomes more recognisable
and reliable. The WEST app may help facilitate this and make booking quicker, more accessible, and
seamless across the whole WEST network, between buses and other transport options.

Our Longer-Term Ambitions
Our ambition is that all entry points onto the public transport network – bus stops, railway stations,
and interchanges – and all vehicles are easily identifiable as part of a common network and brand
with co-ordinated services, integrated ticketing, and comprehensive information.

40
Bus Passenger Safety and Security
Our Ambition
To provide a safe and secure environment at all stages of a passenger’s journey, including at
bus stops, on-board and walking to and from stops.

Challenges and Opportunities
Perceptions of feeling unsafe or the fear of crime are experienced differently between individuals
based on a range of factors (age, gender, race etc), as well as previous experiences. It is imperative
to actively engage with local end users who abstain from bus travel to gain a deeper understanding
of their perspectives.

Our approach
The Bus Passenger Safety Audit has been established, with bus stop and walking route audits
undertaken at identified sites, and we will implement its recommendations.
We will work with local highway authorities, transport operators, the West of England Women’s
Commission, and the police to improve safety and the security of the bus network through training
and education and awareness campaigns.

Our Short-Term Proposals
Through our short-term proposals:
• We will work with the public to better understand concerns and fears that may deter them from using
the bus.
• We will seek to undertake safety Bus Passenger Safety Audit of all bus stops and walking routes in the
BSIP area and produce design guidance tailored to different geographical contexts. Improvements will
be sought to wayfinding, lighting, and CCTV.
• We will look to enhance collaboration between the transport operators and the Police, potentially
through a Safer Travel Partnership approach.
• We will work towards standardising training programmes for all staff across the bus network and
establishing consistent response procedures.
• We will work towards producing education and awareness campaigns for staff and passengers to inform
individuals on how to handle incidents and how to safely intervene or report concerning behaviour.
These early approaches have the potential to further empower users and encourage a safer and more
respectful environment on our buses and will be supported by our regional ‘last bus guarantee’ approach
– a key part of our West of England Bus Passenger Charter.

Our longer-term ambitions
In the longer term, we will seek to ensure consistent training is implemented and delivered across the
WEST network and will look to set up bus driver support programmes to safeguard their well-being.
We will also consider a centralised system for collecting and sharing incident data. Part of this may
involve making reporting incident convenient and accessible for passengers through better use of
technology.

41
Accessibility and Inclusion
Our Ambition
We want to ensure that the bus network offers end to end safety and accessibility for all users;
on the journey to a bus stop or station, at bus stops and on buses themselves. Establishing an
accessible, inclusive, and safe transport system will ensure that everybody has the ability and
the confidence to use our network.

Challenges and Opportunities
The BSIP refresh allows us to further tailor our Bus Passenger Safety Audit to consider accessibility
and inclusion needs, and to consider developing new ambitions where necessary. We will look to
improve physical, digital, and financial accessibility to our network as well as our bus fleet and bus
stops to ensure that they can align with legal requirements and best practices, including kerb height
and crossing placement.

Our approach
We will ensure that staff across the network receive training modules focusing on accessibility,
inclusivity, and diversity so that these issues are properly considered across the WEST network. We
will also look to fund an equality officer who would be employed to ensure accessibility and inclusion
are properly considered across the WEST network.

Our Short-Term Proposals
Consider introduction of free travel all day for holders of disabled English National Concessionary
Travel Scheme (ENCTS) passes and any companions.
All buses across our mix of local bus services (including DRT) will be wheelchair accessible and we
will seek to ensure all buses have audio visual equipment fitted for next-stop information. All newly
built buses will require both features from October 2024 through our EP process. We will also seek
to fit as many buses as possible with USB charging points, WiFi, and internal and external CCTV.
We will work towards a regional training standard for all our bus drivers and operational staff
that focuses on disability awareness (with a particular focus on hidden disabilities such as
neurodiversity), care for passengers with special needs, first aid, health and safety, vulnerable
passenger protection, and emergency procedures.
Our staff at interchanges will look to support passengers with a range of needs, including parents
with pushchairs, and our bus operators will be encouraged to offer an inclusive and accessible work
environment, with equal opportunities for all.

Our longer-term ambitions
We have developed a bus passenger safety audit template to consider accessibility at each bus stop.
Post audit, we would like to upgrade our bus stops to reflect the DfT guidance on Inclusive Mobility
and may consider the following points:
• Provision of Help Points at bus stops where waiting passengers may feel particularly vulnerable.
• Use of a disruptions management tool, ensuring communication of any changes to bus routes for
visually impaired and guide dog users who rely on known, learnt routes.
• Investigate providing quiet areas to minimise disorientation, anxiety, and stress.

42
A Passenger Voice
The West of England Bus Passenger Charter seeks to empower
passengers by clearly setting out what they can expect when travelling
by bus in the region and gives them a voice to feedback when
expectations are not met.
The current charter has been approved and adopted into our EP and will
be published on each of our regional local transport authority websites
in the summer of 2024 in plain English.
We will promote the charter as part of a wider BSIP Communications
and Marketing package later in 2024 and ensuring that the charter is
visible.
The Bus Passenger Charter will be reviewed annually against latest
guidance from the DfT and strengthened by our community consultation
approach.
Through the charter we will consider setting up a single bus passenger
contact point to ensure passengers can raise issues about their
experiences of using local buses across our region and receive a reply,
with the issue fully tracked by us at each stage of its journey.
The proposals in Appendix D will be considered by the EP as part of the
2024 review of the Bus Passenger Charter.

43
Improvements to our bus fleet
Our Ambition
Our region will be served by a cutting-edge fleet of zero-emission buses designed to
minimise bus stop dwell time, and each with a class leading internal environment focusing on
accessibility, information and safety with audio-visual next stop information, USB charging, and
two wheelchair spaces on every bus.

Challenges and Opportunities
Currently, 15% of our bus fleet is over 15 years old and there are low satisfaction levels with on-
board conditions. The age of some of our buses presents opportunities for replacement with lower
emission vehicle, and First Bus and Stagecoach have committed to fully convert their fleets to zero-
emission vehicles by 2035 and purchase no new diesel vehicles from 2023.
In March 2024 our region was successful in attracting Government funding support the introduction
of zero-emission electric buses through the second Zero Emission Bus Regional Area (ZEBRA)
programme. The MCA was successful in winning £6.6 million for 74 buses and NSC (a rural area as
defined by DfT) was awarded £2.1 million for 24 buses.
Government funding will provide 25% of the purchase costs for the vehicles, with First Bus providing
over £50 million of investment to support the purchase of the buses. We will work closely with First
Bus to support the roll-out of these buses across our regional network through 2024 and beyond.

Our Short-Term Proposals
To support our plans to re-optimise our local bus network our approach for the short-term we will:
• Seek funding to cover the difference between Euro VI diesel bus and zero-emission electric bus
purchase costs for further new buses.
• Explore ways of further implementing audio-visual equipment and agreeing minimum cleaning
standards with all our local bus operators on the WEST network.
• Start to explore how we will fully decarbonise our bus fleet by engaging with energy providers and
technology manufacturers to understand the scale of work required and its cost and time impact.

Our Longer-Term Ambitions
In the longer-term we will seek to ensure all buses in the region will be zero emission by 2035 or
earlier and look to support this transition by considering the installation of twenty ultra-fast 500amp
electric vehicle chargers at interchanges, layovers, and park and ride sites.
Continue the work to decarbonise our buses with energy providers and move to a delivery phase
where opportunities and funding were identified in the short-term period. In addition, we will also
start work with partner operators and the wider fuel distribution network to investigate the ability to
operate hydrogen fuel-cell buses.

44
Transformational Network
Our Ambition
We want to lead a greener recovery, reflecting a long-term reduction in car dependency and an
increase in the use of alternative, sustainable transport forms, including bus travel. This will
support our aim of fulfilling our carbon-neutral pledge by 2030 and in delivering a financially
viable bus network.

Our regional GDP contribution to the national economy is significant, and the growth and economic
impact we want will require a change in the transport network we rely on.
As we look towards the future, and our aspiration to deliver the WEST network, two challenges
remain in the form of continued need for passenger growth to financially underpin the improvements
we want to see to services across our network and continued levels of car dependency, which
remains high and particularly impacts orbital trips and journeys outside the Bristol urban area.
This BSIP will maintain the momentum gained in the last two years for passenger growth that out-
paces the national average and we are on course to exceed 100 million passenger journeys per year
by 2036. The Bristol Low Emission Zone and Bath Clean Air Zone have already had an impact on how
people travel, helping move people towards the bus network has been supported by more innovative
ways of personal movement including e-scooters and WEST bike.

Our Short-Term Proposals
Our short-term approach to a transformational network will see the partnership work towards
policies and measures that will follow the overarching themes set out below:
Ambition Outcomes
Continued focus on quality Getting the basics right, finding and delivering ‘quick wins’ and
growing passenger use further.
Continued focus on core buses Nurturing the core bus network using our already successful
formula of enhanced funding support.
High quality interchange Establish a network of high-quality interchanges as a first step
to realising AssessWEST outcomes.
Toolkit approach Continue to combine funding streams to maximise the benefits
that joint working can deliver.
Consider different delivery Understand how we may better achieve our vision for a
models revitalised network through alternative delivery models such as
our own EP+ style, or franchising.

45
Our Longer-Term Ambitions
WEST as a brand will evolve until it becomes synonymous with public transport across the West
of England. We will look at any opportunities provided in the future to go further in establishing a
world-class integrated public transport network.
We aspire to have a fully devolved transport authority acting as the MCA’s transport body. This will
allow for more powerful, centralised, and ambitious decision making. This approach may also be
followed by NSC, individually or jointly with the MCA. With the powers afforded to WEST – like those
in London, the West Midlands, or Greater Manchester – we will deliver further improvements on top
of our existing BSIP programme by re-evaluating and increasing our ambitions across the region.

46
Future network delivery options under
consideration
Across our region we would like to have a greater say in how our network is delivered and greater
control of the passenger experiences. This may include the power to specify routes, frequencies,
and ticketing arrangements or create even more productive partnerships with our existing local bus
operators.
Emerging legislation may provide opportunities and powers to establish a ‘Transport for London’
style body under the joint ownership of the LTAs. This approach could be underpinned by the
following tenets:
Tenet Outcomes
‘Best Passenger Experience’ Continued project coordination, quicker decision making, and
continued linkage with JLTP.
A single unified network Development of segregated corridor approaches under a single
brand and delivery model- future for WEST.
Network consolidation Comprehensive, connected and regionally equitable network
that removes transport poverty.
Simple and cost effective TOTO network wide and integration on all forms underpinned by
simple, low, and capped fares.
Innovation in technology A national testbed for practical and more advanced technology
including autonomous vehicles.

There are two approaches that we will explore as we look to deliver WEST:

An EP with greater powers
We already have a well-functioning EP in place that has seen all partners work together to make
gains in the areas of passenger growth and network uniformity. We know there is more work to do
to gain and retain trust in the local bus network across our region and feel that an even stronger EP
approach could achieve this.
Although EP+ is not a recognised term, this is an approach we will explore with our local bus
operating partners. We will consider how we can deliver greater success through approaches
that allow local bus operators to financially contribute more significantly to the network in return
for longer-term commercial security and the benefits that centralising some functions, such
as marketing and fares by the WEST body may bring. This evolution of our current EP may be
considered a partial step towards franchising but would seek to retain commercial freedoms for
local bus operators, exploring how a financial contribution model could work.

Franchising of the regional bus network
Through this BSIP, subject to funding and resources being available, both the MCA and NSC will
consider undertaking the preliminary work to explore if an alternative network delivery model, such
as franchising, may be of more benefit to each partner, or the region if our present EP is unable to
deliver the substantial progress towards the high-level objectives in the BSIP and EP Plan.
We will look closely at any emerging legislation in respect of the bus industry and take full advantage
of any opportunity to better deliver bus services to more people across our region, making use of any
funding or policy changes to deliver a revitalised, efficient, and balanced WEST bus network.

47
Section Five
Targets, Performance
Monitoring, and Reporting

48
Introduction
This section sets out the targets made in the last BSIP, and the progress which has been made since.
In the 2021 BSIP, no targets were set for network coverage and service hours.
This section should be considered alongside the relevant BCAs where available. Whilst this BSIP
– and these targets – cover the entire West of England BSIP area, two BCAs are to be published
separately by the MCA and NSC.

Bus journey times
Designated corridors have seen a journey time reduction above the targets for 2025. Further work is
needed to reach the target 10% journey time reduction by 2030.

Bus punctuality
As discussed in previous chapters, punctuality in the region has not yet recovered to pre-pandemic
levels. This is due to a range of factors from delays caused by traffic to issues relating to staff
shortages. The past year has seen an increase in punctuality, from 71% in the first half to 73% in the
second half and continuing that trend will see us reach our 2030 target.

Passenger growth
Our region has seen strong patronage growth over the last two years, and we are on track to meet
the targets set.

Passenger satisfaction
As elsewhere in the country, passenger satisfaction has seen a decline since pre-pandemic levels.
While we can see that trend reversing, more work is needed to meet the targets set. Our proposals
and ambitions are targeted at all stages of the passenger journey and would contribute to increasing
satisfaction.

Bus fleet de-carbonisation
We have made strong progress against our bus fleet de-carbonisation targets, with nearly all buses
in our region now meeting the Euro VI emission standards and strong year on year progress on
zero-emission buses (ZEBs). Progress is expected to improve further as the ZEBs being procured
through the recent regional Zero Emission Bus Regional Area (ZEBRA) fund success are rolled out.
Through this fund, the MCA was successful in being awarded £6.6 million for new electric 74 buses
and NSC was awarded £2.2 million for 24 new electric buses, with Government funding 25% of the
vehicle purchase costs and First Bus investing £50 million to support the purchase of these buses.

49
Table 5-1 – BSIP Target Progress (*indicates baseline)
Category Target 2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 Target by 2025
Bus journey times Reduce average bus journey times (minutes) on 61 *63 No data 55 56 61 62
designated corridors by 2% by 2025 and by 10%
by 2030
Bus punctuality Achieve 95% of services running on time, *77% N/A 74% 71% 67% 72% 82%
defined as being no more than 1 minute early or
5 minutes late, by 2030. Target for 2024/25 is
82%
Passenger growth Return to pre-pandemic patronage levels by - *70.2m 22.5m 46.8m 55.3m 63.7m 70m
2025 and grow patronage by at least 24% from
that level by 2030
Bus Passenger Increase bus passenger satisfaction to 89% for 85% *86% No data No data 78% 79% 89%
satisfaction 2025 and 95% for 2030
Bus fleet de- By the end of 2023 all buses operating in the No data No data 48.2% 88.6% 96% 98% 100%
carbonisation BSIP area will meet the Euro VI emission
standard
Bus fleet de- By 2030, at least 75% of the local fleet will be No data No data 0% 0% 3.6% 6.6% N/A
carbonisation either zero-emission or ultra-low emission and
by 2035 all buses will be zero-emission buses
(ZEBs).
Letters of
Support

51

First West of England Limited
Enterprise House
Easton Road
Bristol
BS5 0DZ

31st May 2024
To whom it may concern.
BSIP Refresh
I am writing to give First West of England’s support to the proposals and ambitions set
out by the West of England Mayoral Combined Authority and North Somerset Council in
their BSIP refresh documentation.
Through strong partnership working, First West of England, the MCA and North
Somerset Council have achieved significant growth in patronage and customer numbers
through investment in networks, fares and ticketing, innovations such as Tap On, Tap Off
ticketing across all our services, and joint marketing campaigns to position the bus as an
affordable, sustainable and convenient travel option.

We look forward to continuing this partnership working to build on the progress made
to date and accelerate the growth in bus use in the region

Yours sincerely,

Rob Pymm
Commercial Director
First West of England

52

11th June 2024

Bob Scowen
Head of Integrated Transport Solutions
West of England Combined Authority
Wost of England Bus Service lmprovement Plan (BSIP)
Dear Bob
I’m writing to confirm that Stagecoach West has been engaged in the preparation of
the updated 2024 West of England Bus Service Improvement Plan (BSIP) and is fully
supportive of its content and ambition.
Stagecoach has been consulted over various parts of the bid via the Enhanced
Partnership Advisory Panel and looks forward to engaging further with West of England
Combined Authority in the future, to work together to achieve the ambitions set out in
the BSIP.
West of England Combined Authority has remained supportive of bus opeerators in
recognising the challenges faced.
Stagecoach West is fully committed to supporting the BSIP’s implementation and looks
forward to full engagement the future to support the plan and make a positive impact
on our community in the West of England.
Sincerely

Chris Hanson
Managing Director, Stagecoach West

53
Protran House, Boundary Road, Black Rock, Brighton BN2 STJ
Tel 01273 681 681, Email colin@thebiglemon.com

29th June 2024

To whom it may concern
Re: BSIP Update
I have read over the updates to the BSIP and at this stage I have no comments to add
and therefore The Big Lemon CIC will endorse the programme going forward.
Yours sincerely

Colin Morris
General Manager
The Big lemon CIC,
registered in England and Wales, number 6045786.
Web www.thebiglemon.com
Facebook www.facebook.com/thebiglemon
Twitter @thebiglemon

54
Appendix A
Our Bus Vision

55
Figure 1- BSIP in context of regional policies and
strategies

Local Industrial Strategy
Driving long-term clean and inclusive growth and ambition in our region’s economy

Climate emergency
In 2030, the West of England is net zero carbon

Joint Local Transport Plan 4
Our vision for transport up to 2036. How we will aim to achieve a well-connected sustainable
transport network that works for residents, offering greater, realistic travel choices and
making walking, cycling and public transport the natural way to travel.

City Regional
Sustainable
Transport
Transport Bus Strategy Bus Service
Decarbonisation
Settlement & Bus 2020 Improvement Plan
Study
Transformation
Funding

Spatial
Regional plans for
Future Transport Local authority Development
other transport
Zone transport plan Strategy and
modes
Local Plans

56
NBS Goal West of England Approach
More frequent The West of England Bus Strategy sets out our plans for a high frequency radial and orbital bus network. This is
currently being considered through the AssessWEST programme (funded by BSIP 2021) and furthered through this
BSIP.
Faster & more reliable We have already invested in bus priority to make buses faster and more reliable. Our ambition is for more
metroBus style infrastructure, and we propose to work with operators to increase dual door / faster flow buses on
our network.
Cheaper We have introduced three fare packages through the BSIP 2021 (fare caps, free travel during birthday months, and
free fares for care leavers / job seekers). We want to continue the National £2 Fare Cap and relate distance and
fares equitably across the region.
More comprehensive Our regional bus strategy sets out our ambition for a more comprehensive bus network using high frequency radial
and orbital services with increased interchange. WESTLink has ensured that underserved areas have improved
levels of access.
Easier to understand AssessWEST will define a comprehensive and easy to use service network connected at high quality hubs. To
further increase information access, we will roll out e-paper displays, over £1m of RTI technology, and QR codes at
every bus for next bus times.
Easier to use We will refine the current multi-operator ticket approach, introduce the MaaS platform (West App), maintain daily
and weekly fare capping with Tap On, Tap Off, make information more widely available, and improve core network
frequencies.
Better to ride in metroBus routes in Bristol are equipped with dual-door buses to speed up boarding and alighting, as well as WiFi
and USB charging ports. Our ambition is to replicate this model through the emerging AssessWEST regional bus
network on radial and orbital routes.
Better integration with other The West of England Bus Strategy has been written with an interchange-based system in mind. This will create
services & modes better connections between bus services and by design the rail network, consistent WEST branding, and better
information sharing between the modes.
Greener The regional bus fleet uses a combination of Euro 6 diesel and biogas buses, both of which help improve air quality.
The West of England has also been successful in a Zebra (2) bid and delivery of [XX] electric vehicles will kick start
a wider fleet rejuvenation.
Accessible & inclusive network To support passengers with hearing and sight difficulties as well as those unfamiliar to the area, almost 60% of
buses have been fitted with audio and visual announcements. Our proposals will create a single accessibility
training standard for drivers in the region.
NBS Goal West of England Approach
Innovative We will further develop WESTlink DRT to close transport gaps rural areas and connect to the core network.
WESTlocal will continue to allow local communities to develop and initiate their own transport solutions in
response to the specific needs of their community.
Safe mode of transport – ‘seen Our bus passenger safety audit evaluates and records the safety of bus stops and walking routes. Our proposals
as safe’ now focus on developing a safter travel partnership and combining this with accessibility proposals, to ensure
safety is consistently designed in.

Level 2
100 Wharfside Street
Birmingham
B1 1RT
wsp.com
WSP UK Limited makes no warranties or guarantees, actual or implied, in relation to this report, or the ultimate commercial, technical, economic, or
financial effect on the project to which it relates, and bears no responsibility or liability related to its use other than as set out in the contract under
which it was supplied.

58
Appendix B
Current Bus Offer
to Passengers
59
Contents
1. Introduction 3

2. Bus use in the BSIP area 4

2.1. 2021 Objective: High Mode Share For Buses Of Overall Travel Market 4

2.2. 2021 Objective: High Level Of Passenger Satisfaction 4

3. Bus services in the BSIP area 6

3.1 2021 Objective: High quality bus service 6

Frequency and accessibility 6

Journey time, Punctuality and Reliability 6

Bus Lanes 6

Investment and Spend 7

4. Service Frequency Maps 15

5. Bus Stop Frequency and walking times 23

6. Commerical, Supported and Enhanced Services 31

60
1 Introduction
This appendix is in support of Section 2 of the 2024 Bus Service Improvement Plan (BSIP) Refresh
and presents the data used in the analysis as well as the full set of maps.
The data presented in this section is an update to that included in the 2021 BSIP and has been
obtained from:
• Local bus operators
• Customer surveys
• DfT bus statistics
• National Travel Survey statistics
• Census data
The Bus Connectivity Assessment developed in support of this BSIP Refresh also addresses data
themes discussed in the BSIP.

61
2 Bus use in the BSIP area
2.1 2021 Objective: High Mode Share For Buses Of Overall Travel Market
Table 2-1 is based on Department for Transport (2024) Bus Statistics, Local bus passenger journeys
(BUS01e).
Table 2-1 - Passenger journeys on local bus services by local authority services (millions)
Authority 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23
Bath & North East Somerset 11.9 14.7 12.1 2.9 7.9 9.4
Bristol 38.4 42.8 40.3 13.1 25.6 29.7
North Somerset 7.6 5.5 5.3 1.6 3.5 4.5
South Gloucestershire 10.4 9.3 8.4 2.6 5.5 6.6
Total 68.3 72.3 66.1 20.1 42.4 50.2

Table 2-2 and Figure 2-1 are based on Department for Transport (2024) Bus Statistics, Passenger
journeys on local bus services per head by local authority (BUS01f).
Table 2-2 - Passenger journeys on local bus services per head by local authority
Authority 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Bath & North East Somerset 63.1 76.7 62.6 14.6 40.9 49.0
Bristol 83.6 92.3 86.9 28.1 54.3 63.1
South Gloucestershire 37.3 32.9 29.5 9.0 18.8 22.5
North Somerset 35.7 25.9 24.6 7.4 16.2 20.5
West of England MCA and North 60.0 62.8 57.1 17.9 36.2 42.8
Somerset
England outside London 45.3 44.9 41.9 15.2 28.5 33.9
Metropolitan areas in England 76.1 75.2 69.9 27.1 48.6 57.5
Non-metropolitan areas 35 34 32 11 22 26

Figure 2-1 - Passenger journeys per head per local authority in the last five years

62
2.2 2021 Objective: High Level Of Passenger Satisfaction
Table 2-4 is based on results from the surveys run by Transport Focus. This was knows as the ‘Bus
Passenger Journey’ up to and including 2019, and ‘Your Bus Journey’ since restarting in 2023.
Table 2-3 - Bus passenger satisfaction in the Bus Journey survey run by Transport Focus
Overall satisfaction 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2023
West of England + North Somerset 89% 85% 89% 85% 86% 77%
Metropolitan areas in England 86% 85% 85% 87% 87% 78%

63
3 Bus services in the BSIP area
3.1 2021 Objective: High quality bus service
Frequency and accessibility
Chapter 4 Contains a full set of maps showing the average service frequency at different time of the
day and week. These were created based on General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS) data covering
Q1 2024.
Chapter 5 presents a series of maps showing all the bus stops in the BSIP area, their average
service frequency as well as a 5-min walking area to the stops.

Journey time, Punctuality and Reliability
Table 3-5 is based on Department for Transport (2024) Bus Statistics, Bus Reliability and Punctuality
(BUS09).
Table 3-1 - Non-frequent bus services running on time by local authority
Area 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2021/22 2022/23
West of England+ North Somerset 82% 77% NA NA 75%
Metropolitan areas in England 84% 84% 84% 87% 86%
Non-metropolitan areas in England 83% 83% 85% 85% 81%
England outside London 84% 84% 85% 84% 80%

Bus Lanes
Table 3-3 and Figure 3-1 are based on internal information provided by each Authority. Section 3 and
Appendix C outlines the progress made in terms of bus infrastructure.
Table 3-2 - Miles of bus lane per local authority in 2021 and 2024
Local authority Miles of Bus Lane (2021) Miles of Bus Lane (2024)
Bath & North East Somerset 2.36 2.36
Bristol 21.19 21.19
South Gloucestershire 8.05 11.22
North Somerset 2.43 5.2
TOTAL 34.03 39.97

64
Figure 3-1 - Location of bus lanes in the BSIP area

Investment and Spend
Figure 3-3 is based on Department for Transport (2024) Local bus vehicle distance travelled
(BUS02_mi).
Figure 3-2 - Supported and Commercial vehicle miles on local bus services

65
Figure 3-4 and Table 3-3 are based on internal information obtained from the Mayoral Combined
Authority and North Somerset. Chapter 6 contains maps at Unitary Authority level showing the
different types of services overlaid with key destinations. These maps show the distinction between
Commercial Services, Supported Services (i.e. socially necessary services) and BSIP Enhanced
services, where operating hours or service frequencies of a commercial service were increased.
Figure 3-3 - Coverage of commercial and supported services in the BSIP area

66
Table 3-3 – Supported or enhanced services in the West of England
Service Route Days and hours of operation Contract or de minimis Area Comments
Number (all rounded to the nearest 15 arrangement
mins)
10 Avonmouth – Lawrence Mon – Sun 0430 to 2100 Contract Bristol Interworks with Service
Weston – Westbury-on-Trym 11
– Southmead Hospital
11 Avonmouth – Shirehampton Mon – Sun 0430 to 2100 Contract Bristol Interworks with Service
– Westbury-on-Trym – 10
Southmead Hospital
11 Bath City Centre – Mon – Sat 0845- to 1730 Contract Bath and North n/a
Bathampton East Somerset
12 Bath City Centre – Haycombe Mon – Sat 0800 to 1800 Contract Bath and North n/a
East Somerset
12 Severn Beach – Cribbs Mon – Fri 0545 to 2300 Contract South Glos/ n/a
Causeway – Bristol Sat 0800 to 2000 Bristol
13 Shirehampton – Bristol City Mon – Fri 0615 to1930 Contract Bristol n/a
Centre Sat 0830 to 1930
Sun 1000 to 1900
17 Keynsham – Southmead Mon – Sat 0700 to 2200 Contract Keynsham to South Glos/ n/a
Sun 0800 to 2100 Kingswood. Commercial B&NES
Kingswood- Southmead
19 Bath – Cribbs Causeway Mon – Fri 0530 to 2130 Contract Sunday only. South Glos n/a
Sat 0745 to 2115 Commercial rest of time
Sun 0745 to 1815
2 Bath City Centre – Mulberry Mon – Fri 0600 to 0000 Contract Bath and North n/a
Park Sat 0800 to 0000 East Somerset
Sun 0900 to 1900
20 Twerton – Bath City Centre – Mon – Sat 0730 to 1930 Contract Bath and North n/a
University of Bath East Somerset
21 Newbridge P&R – Bath City Mon – Sat 0615 to 2030 Contract Bath and North n/a
Centre Sun 0930-1800 East Somerset

67
Service Route Days and hours of operation Contract or de minimis Area Comments
Number (all rounded to the nearest 15 arrangement
mins)
31 Lansdown P&R – Bath City Mon – Sat 0615 to 2030 Contract Bath and North n/a
Centre Sun 0930-1800 East Somerset
35 Marshfield – Kingswood Mon – Sat 0700 to 1745 Contract South Glos n/a
41 Odd Down P&R – Bath City Mon – Sat 0615 to 2030 Sun Contract Bath and North n/a
Centre 0930-1800 East Somerset
505 Long Ashton P & R – Mon – Sat 0600 to 2300 Sun Contract Bristol n/a
Southmead Hospital 1000 to 1900
515 Stockwood – Hartcliffe Mon – Sat 0600 to 1830 Contract Bristol n/a
522 Bristol – Midsomer Norton – Mon – Sat 0500 to 2200 Sun BSIP funded contract Bath and North n/a
Bath 0700 to 2000 Brislington – Bristol city East Somerset
centre commercial and
Odd Down P&R to Bath
city centre commercial
525 Emersons Green – Yate Mon – Sat 0700 to 2000 BSIP funded contract South Glos n/a
Sun 0800 to 2000
620 Old Sodbury – Bath Mon – Fri 0615 to 1630 Contract South Glos n/a
Sat 0715 to 1630
6A Bath City Centre – Larkhall – Mon –Fri 0630 and 1900 to 2345 Some contracted journeys Bath and North In addition to daytime
Bath City Centre Sat 0830 to 1030 and 1900 to East Somerset operating services 6 and
2345 7
Sun 0915 to 1915

700 Bath City Centre – Sion Hill Mon – Sat 0845 to 1715 contract Bath and North n/a
East Somerset
716 Bath City Centre – Newbridge Mon – Sat 0830 to 1615 contract Bath and North n/a
East Somerset
734 Bath City Centre – Bathwick Mon – Sat 0930 to 1500 contract Bath and North n/a
East Somerset

68
Service Route Days and hours of operation Contract or de minimis Area Comments
Number (all rounded to the nearest 15 arrangement
mins)
779 Bath City Centre – Gloucester Mon – Sat 1045 to 1700 contract Bath and North n/a
Road East Somerset
8 Bath City Centre – Kingsway Mon – Fri 0715 to 2330 contract Bath and North n/a
Sat 0845 to 2330 East Somerset
84 Yate – Chipping Sodbury – Mon – Sat 0900 to 1800 contract South Glos n/a
Wotton-Under-Edge
85 Yate – Chipping Sodbury – Mon – Sat 0700-1800 contract South Glos n/a
Wotton-Under-Edge
86 Yate – Kingswood Mon – Sat 0800 to 1900 contract South Glos n/a
9 Portway P&R – Bristol City Mon – Sat 0615 to 2125 Sun contract Bristol n/a
Centre – Brislington P&R 0930 to 1830
R3 Southdown – Ralph Allen School days Start & finish times contract Bath and North n/a
School East Somerset
Y6 Yate – Southmead Hospital Mon – Fri 0610 to 2230 De minimis South Glos n/a
Sat 0610 to 2145
Sun 0800 to 1930
Y1/Y2 Chipping Sodbury - Yate - Mon – Fri 0530 to 0030 BSIP Enhanced Bristol Y1 Increased to every 30
Winterbourne - Bristol City Sat 0630 to 0030 commercial service mins Monday to Saturday
Centre Sun 0845 to 2345 and hourly Sunday and
Public Holidays. Y2
new service operating
every 30 mins Monday
to Saturday and hourly
on Sunday and Public
Holidays
T1 Thornbury - Almondsbury - Mon – Fri 0615 to 0030 BSIP Enhanced Bristol Increased to every 20
Bradley Stoke - Bristol City Sat 0715 to 0030 commercial service minutes Monday to
Centre Sun 0730 to 0015 Friday

69
Service Route Days and hours of operation Contract or de minimis Area Comments
Number (all rounded to the nearest 15 arrangement
mins)
172 Bath - Peasedown St. John - Mon – Sat 0715 to 2300 BSIP Enhanced Bath and North Revised route linking
Midsomer Norton - Paulton commercial service East Somerset Bath and Bristol via the
- Bristol Somer Valley, increasing
service frequency
to every 12 minutes
between Midsomer
Norton and Bath
combined with services
173/174 and 522 Monday
to Friday.
m2 Long Ashton P&R - Bristol Mon – Fri 0600 to 2130 BSIP Enhanced Bristol Increased to every 12
City Centre - Long Ashton Sat 0700 to 2130 commercial service mins Monday to Friday
P&R and 15 mins Saturday
5 Weston-super-Mare Mon – Sat 0700 to 1900 Contract North Somerset Cross-linked to service
Interchange – Grove Park X5 (below).
circular
6 Weston-super-Mare - Worle Mon – Sat 1930 to 2230 BSIP Enhanced North Somerset BSIP-funded addition
commercial service to daytime commercial
service
7 Locking Parklands - Worle Mon – Sat 2000 to 2330 BSIP Enhanced North Somerset BSIP-funded addition
commercial service to daytime commercial
service
9 Weston-super-Mare - West Mon – Fri 1030 to 1430 Contract North Somerset n/a
Wick
51s Winscombe - Churchill School days Start & finish times Contract North Somerset n/a
Academy
125 Weston-super-Mare - Mon – Sat 0730 to 1800 Contract North Somerset n/a
Wrington

70
Service Route Days and hours of operation Contract or de minimis Area Comments
Number (all rounded to the nearest 15 arrangement
mins)
126 Weston-super-Mare - Wells Mon - Sat 0700 to 1900 Contract held by Somerset North Somerset BSIP-funded jointly with
Council Somerset Council
X1 Weston-super-Mare – Bristol Mon – Fri 0830 to 1630 BSIP Enhanced North Somerset BSIP-funded
via Backwell commercial service enhancement to
commercial service,
increasing frequency
from 3 to 4 buses per
hour
X4 Portishead – Bristol via Pill Mon – Fri 0830 to 1900 BSIP Enhanced North Somerset BSIP-funded
commercial service enhancement to
commercial service,
increasing frequency
from 2 to 3 buses per
hour
X5 Weston-super-Mare – Mon – Fri 0630 to 1900 Contract North Somerset Cross-linked to service 5
Portishead via Clevedon Sat 0800 to 1830 (above).
X6 Clevedon – Bristol via Mon – Sat 2030 to 2330 BSIP Enhanced North Somerset BSIP-funded addition
Nailsea and Backwell commercial service to daytime commercial
service
X7 Clevedon – Bristol via Sun 0800 to 2230 Contract North Somerset n/a
Nailsea and Backwell
X8 Nailsea – Bristol via Mon – Sat 0700 to 1900 Contract North Somerset n/a
Backwell
X9 Nailsea – Bristol via Wraxall Mon – Sat 2100 to 2400 BSIP Enhanced North Somerset BSIP-funded addition
commercial service to daytime commercial
service

71
Service Route Days and hours of operation Contract or de minimis Area Comments
Number (all rounded to the nearest 15 arrangement
mins)
X10 Portishead – Cribbs Mon – Sat 0900 to 1500 Enhanced (De minimis) North Somerset BSIP–funded addition
Causeway to commercial service
which operates M-F
peak hours between
Portishead and
Southmead Hospital.

Further to the above, there are the 9 core WESTlink DRT zones and 12 shared zones operating in the BSIP area. These can be seen on an interactive
zone map here: https://journeyplanner.travelwest.info/?poi=wesTlink. All of the zones operate Mon – Sat 0700 to 1900. WESTlink is jointly funded by
the MCA and NSC from the BSIP allocation.

72
4 Service Frequency Maps

73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
5 Bus Stop Frequency and walking times

81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
6 Commerical, Supported and Enhanced Services

89
90
91
92
Appendix C
Improvements
Programme to
2024/25
93
Contents
Introduction 5

1.1 What we have achieved 5

Improved Services 5

Fares 6

WESTlink Journeys 8

Real-time Information 9

Priority Bus Lanes 9

Additional - Skills Training 10

1.2 Delivery Plans 12

1.3 Bus Driver Recruitment and Retention 19

What we’ve done so far 19

94
1.1 Introduction
This appendix provides additional context and detail on the BSIP progress and achievements
highlighted in Section 3 of the 2024 BSIP refresh document.
This appendix provides supplementary detail on our BSIP achievements, the changes in funding
allocation since the 2021 BSIP and the marketing campaign underpinning the success of the bus
driver recruitment campaign.

1.2 What we have achieved
Since the 2021 BSIP funding award, our partners across the BSIP area have made significant
progress in improving the local bus network and achieving significant passenger growth.
This has been a direct result of the additional funding allocated through BSIP and targeted at distinct
elements of the bus service network through our Delivery Plan approach.
Further detail on our achievements so far as presented in the Section 3 infographic is provided
below.

Improved Services
We have made a good start in improving our bus service frequency, reliability, punctuality, staff
retention, and the roll-out of Europe’s largest single DRT network (WESTLink).
To date, we have invested more than £5 million across 19 core services across the region and plan
to invest a further £10 million over the next two years. These services are summarised in Table C-1
below.
Table C-1 – Enhanced and Supported bus services across the MCA and NSC areas
Authority Enhanced Services Supported Services
MCA - Y1/Y2 - 522
- T1 - 525
- 172
- m2
NSC - X1 -9
- X4 - 126
- X5 - X10
- X6/X7
- X8
- W3/W7

95
Patronage
Table C-2 below presents the passenger journeys on local bus services per head from 2018 to 2023
with % change between years.
This success is attributed to the enhanced services gaining commerciality within 6 months, a lot
faster rate than initially forecast which subsequently resulted in a program underspend.
The program underspend is advantageous, and allows remaining spend to be reallocated to further
services. These routes are currently being reviewed with communications for their launch planned
for September 2024.

Bus Frequency
Because of the enhanced service funding, we have been able to add further Turn-up-and-go services
to achieve 15-minute frequencies along the enhanced services outline in Table C-1.

Fares
On the 22th Sept 2022, First Bus commercially implemented a £2 fare cap on all bus journeys across
Bristol and Bath and £3.70 on journeys to surrounding areas. Children and young people also
benefitted from a £1 fare cap across all areas.
In January 2023, the £2 fare cap was extended nationally with the support of the Department for
Transport under the ‘Get Around for £2’ scheme which capped the cost of travel selected routes
across operators. Since its launch, the fare cap has nationally increased bus use by 37% (CPT, 2024).
Through collaboration with bus operators across the region, we have introduced three fare packages
which have supported our increase in bus patronage against our baseline through making the option
to travel by bus more affordable.
In January and July 2023, we successfully launched Fare Packages 1 and 2, and Package 3 is due to
go live early summer 2024. A summary of the Fares Packages is detailed in Table C-3 below.
Table C-3 – Fares Packages
Package Detail
Package 1 - Fare Capping, Reductions, • £2 cap on adult single, two-journey and single-
Discounts operator day fares
• £2 cap on AvonRider Day multi-operator fare
• £1 cap fare for persons aged 5 to 15 inclusive
Package 2 - Birthday Offer, Care Leavers • Free travel during birthday month
• Free travel for care experienced persons aged 18 -21
Package 3 - Targeted Offers - Scheduled • Free travel days and weeks on targeted bus routes
for launch Summer 2024 • Discounts on targeted bus routes
• Free travel month for up to 12,000 Job Seekers aged
16-24 after receiving a valid job offer
Across the BSIP area, overall ticket sales have risen by 38% relative to the baseline with the support
of the £2 fare cap aligning to the national statistics. As expected, the largest proportion of ticket
sales was received by adults with a 78% increase and secondly by children at 76%. Student tickets
are in decline however by -36%, which is likely due to the £2 cap offering a lower fare resulting in
students purchasing an adult fare instead.

96
Birthday Bus
Birthday Bus is a promotional offer allowing citizens living within the MCA and NSC areas to benefit
for a month of free bus travel throughout the whole month which their birthday falls. The scheme
launched on Tuesday 1st August 2023, and so far has received over 60,000 applications and almost
820,000 journeys1.
The birthday offer post-survey reveals that 72% of participants chose to use the bus for new trips
which they otherwise would not have taken, of which 47% of participants switched from the private
car!2 The scheme not only has assisted in increasing bus patronage across the BSIP area, but also
incentivised sustainable transport in encouraging almost 50% of users to switch from their private car.

Care Givers
Between July 2023 and April 2024, Free Travel for Care Givers received 475 applications and over
49,000 journeys.

WESTlink Journeys
Since its launch in April 2023, the WESTLink Demand Responsive Travel (DRT) service has achieved
over 150,000+ journeys. WESTLink supplies a network of on-demand mini-bus services to connect
passengers in more remote areas to key services, and the wider bus and train network to improve
regional accessibility. The service is benefitted by the regional fare cap, with a single adult journey
costing only £2.
In April 2024, WESTLink underwent significant changes, including making the zones smaller and
booking systems more accessible. The benefits of the upgraded service are summarised as follows:
• The service has partnered with Avon Rider tickets to introduce a fair cap to make it easier for
people to travel across multiple service and to make sure they don’t pay twice!
• Anti-cannibalistic, avoiding overlap with timetabled bus services and instead feeds people to the
network instead of duplicating
• Smaller zones mean vehicles travel shorter distances and are available to more people

97
1
Recorded between August 2023 and April 2024
2
From August 2023 to April 2024
Figure C-2 – Westlink Map

Real-time Information
We have invested over £500k into improving access to real-time digital information across our
network to install over 300 new information screens including 200 e-paper displays at bus stops.
Installation of new and replacement Real Time Information Units
We are currently working to upgrade 194 bus stops with LED displays, and the MCA is working
with the Unitary Authorities to begin a programme of display upgrades based on date of install and
priority of high passenger boarding at each stop.
At least 40 new RTI units are also being installed based on the highest passenger boardings at bus
stops without RTI units currently across the MCA region.
Install new 4G modems into 241 RTI displays currently on-street and remove existing 3G modems.
In early 2024, the programme to upgrade all RTI units to 4G roaming to improve data connectivity
and information to passengers begun and is estimated to be completed by winter 2025.

98
Priority Bus Lanes
In the 2021 BSIP programme, we set out an ambitious target to significantly increase the length
of the bus priority corridors across the region by delivering 100 miles of new dedicated bus
infrastructure by 20273. NSC was directly awarded £35,160,000 to improve bus lanes across the
North Somerset region which was increased with reallocated funds to 2024 and supplemented with
fundings from CRSTS.
The BSIP funded schemes are estimated to be delivered by December 2025 followed by CRSTS
funded schemes in 2027.
In combination, planned bus lanes across both funding avenues are expected to expand the bus
priority network to 159 miles in total, beyond the initial target and scope of the BSIP and improving
the reliability of bus services to a much wider proportion of the network.
To date, we have made good progress with our plans and have invested up to £45m in bus lane
interventions with over 17% of our plans at delivery status and the remaining 83% still progressing
at planning status.
Of the delivered plans, the bus lanes opened since 2021 are as follows:
• Long Ashton: 2.30 miles
• Barrow Gurney: 0.33 miles
• Beggar Bush Lane: 0.03 miles
• Brockley Combe: 0.11
Total new infrastructure: 2.77 miles

Figure C-2 - Location of bus lanes in BSIP area

* Note DfT have agreed to extend program of delivery for workstreams under this Delivery plan to
2025/26.

99
3
Page 12 https://www.westofengland-ca.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/West-of-England-Bus-Service-Improvement-Plan-1st-Annual-Review-Final-221221.pdf
Additional - Skills Training
The success of the bus network is underpinned by the staff supporting it. In order to ensure our
services continually improve to provide a strong and reliable service, we have invested £190,710 in
training and recruitment activities across the region.
Since October 2022, we have successfully employed 300+ more bus drivers within local operators
across the MCA and NSC areas using this funding.
Additional information around bus driver recruitment is available in Section 1.3 of this appendix.

1.3 Delivery Plans
To meet the priorities of the National Bus Strategy (NBS) and to reflect the views of partners and
stakeholders following engagement for the 2021 BSIP programme, Delivery Plans for 10 areas
were established in the 2021 BSIP for the West of England. These plans were developed to address
the current and future challenges across the BSIP area (as set out in Section 2) and identify
opportunities where we can make the most significant impact, meet our targets, and prioritise
investments. The Delivery Plans categorised by letters A-J are defined in Table C-4 below and align
with the ambitions of the NBS for bus improvements across the UK.
Table C-4 - Delivery Plans.
ID Delivery Plans Descriptions
A Intensive Services Intensive services and investment on key corridors, and
with routes that are easier to understand.
B Bus priority There must be significant increases in bus priority.
C Fares Fares must be lower and simpler.
D Integrated ticketing There must be seamless, integrated local ticketing between
operators and this should be across all types of transport.
E Integrated services Service patterns must be integrated with other modes.
F Single integrated system The local bus network is presented as a single system that
works together, with clear passenger information.
G Modern buses Modern buses and decarbonisation.
H Passenger voice Give bus passengers more of a voice and a say.
I Non-intensive services More demand-responsive services and ‘socially necessary’
transport.
J Long-term Longer term transformation of networks through Bus Rapid
Transit and other measures.

100
Allocation of Funding Adjustment
Since the initial programme was set out (Table 3-2), we have worked closely with the DfT to deliver
our allocation flexibly. Where advantageous, we have moved funding between Delivery Plans to
maximise the benefits of some programmes and drive passenger growth within the BSIP funding
envelope.
Table C-5 below presents the BSIP funding allocation laid out in the 2021 BSIP against the updated
funding allocation towards March 2025.
Table C-6 summarises the progress on the delivery programme for each workstream under the
Delivery Plans, with commentary on the position of each to the by March 2024.
Please note the spending allocation remains flexible and is likely to be adjusted continually until
March 2025 and detail on the exact spend for each Delivery Plan has not been included.

101
Table C-5 – Allocation of funding from the 2021 BSIP
Delivery Plans 2021 Funding Allocation Updated Funding Allocation to 2025/26
ID Description Total Revenue Total Capital % overall Total Revenue Total Capital % overall
Funding (NSC) BSIP Funding (NSC) BSIP
(NSC & MCA) allocation (NSC & MCA) allocation
A Intensive Services £7,500,000 - 7% £13,338,667 - 13%
B Bus priority - £35,160,000 33% - £35,830,000 34%
C Fares £21,466,857 - 20% £14,619,338 - 14%
D Integrated ticketing £110,000 £70,000 0.2% £110,000 £70,000 0.2%
E Integrated services - £12,753,000 12% - £12,083,000 11%
F Single integrated system £5,700,000 - 5% £5,310,233 - 5%
G Modern buses No BSIP Funding – Achieved with Bus No BSIP Funding – Achieved with Bus Operators
Operators through EP through EP
H Passenger voice £80,000 - 0.1% £80,000 - 0.1%
I Non-intensive services £19,848,641 - 19% £18,987,799 - 18%
J Long-term No BSIP Funding – Achieved with Bus No BSIP Funding – Achieved with Bus Operators
Operators through EP through EP
Additional Delivery (EP & Consultancy) £2,700,000 - 3% £4,568,752 - 4%
Additional Skills Training (drivers / engineers) £100,000 - 1% £190,710 - 0.2%
Additional Monitoring and Evaluation - - - £300,000 - 0.3%
Total £57,505,498 £47,983,000 100% £57,505,499 £47,983,000 100%
Total Combined £105,388,498 100% £105,388,498 100%

102
Table C-63 Delivery Programme (by March 2025 and beyond) – Progress Commentary
Delivery Plans to March 2024 Forecast to March 2025 and Beyond
ID Description % Complete Progress RAG Targeted Progress Commentary
(March 2024) completion
date
A Intensive Services
A1 High Frequency, 38% Amber March 2026 Total spend to 2025 is dependent on the level of
Accessible Network patronage along existing routes.
The remaining spend will be extended to March 2026
with the potential to link the program with future funding,
expanding the benefits from service improvements.
B Bus Priority
B1 Bus Priority (NSC) 20% Amber September Some individual schemes have been completed. Funding
2025 for remaining scheme were granted an extension to Sept
2025 by the DfT.
Further extension to March 2026 may be requested to
ensure completion of full programme.
C Fares
C1 Package 1 – Fare Capping, 59% Green March 2025 The subsidised £2 fare offer has been live across the
Reductions, Discounts CA and NSC area for 18 months and will continue until
programme end.
C2 Package 2 – Birthday Offer, 43% Green March 2025 The Birthday Bus Offer has been live across the CA
Care Leavers and NSC since July 2023, and the Care Leavers offer
since October 2023. Fares Package 2 will continue until
programme end
C3 Package 3 – Targeted Offer 0% Green March 2025 Package 3 is scheduled to go live early summer
2024. Once live, the allocated funding will be spent by
programme end.

103
Delivery Plans to March 2024 Forecast to March 2025 and Beyond
ID Description % Complete Progress RAG Targeted Progress Commentary
(March 2024) completion
date
D Integrated ticketing
D1 Multi-Operating Ticketing 0% Green March 2025 Funding part of a wider package of work being led by
Support & Integration CRSTS.
E Integrated Services
E1 Integrated Services (NSC) 3% Amber September Extension to this workstream has been granted by
2025 the DfT for completion by September 2025, in order to
priortise progress with workstream B1.
Further extension to March 2026 may be requested to
ensure completion of full programme.
F Single integrated system
F1 Brand Identity (Single 1% Green March 2025 Workstream has experience programme delays from
Network) sign-off. However, once approved the projects will be
completed by March 2025 within allocated budget.
F2 Programme Marketing and 15% Green March 2025 Workstream has experience programme delays from
Communications sign-off.
The Marketing & Communications programme has
supported BSIP initiatives, including Fare packages and
WESTLink.
Any remaining spend will be used for widespread
marketing of bus travel and an outreach programme.
F3 Travel Guides and Journey 17% Green March 2025 New paper travel guides and maps have been produced
Planning and distributed throughout the region. The WEST
Journey Planning website has been updated with an
improved user experience for fares, service disruptions
and updates to customers. Continuing to work on
improving maps and travel guides (paper & online),
providing information boards at key public transport
locations (hospitals, train stations etc)

104
Delivery Plans to March 2024 Forecast to March 2025 and Beyond
ID Description % Complete Progress RAG Targeted Progress Commentary
(March 2024) completion
date
F4 Within Journey 2% Green March 2025 Currently procuring a large contract for the majority of
Information the spend to provide new real time information displays.
Expected to award a contract in summer 2024 to deliver
new TFT and Digital Timetable Displays (E-paper)
throughout the region.
H Passenger voice
H1 Passenger Charter 0% Green March 2025 Charter has been adopted by the EP Board and is in
place and in use. Budget is allocated for the design and
promotion of charter, which is taking place imminently.
H2 Bus Passenger Safety 67% Green March 2025 The Bus Passenger Safety Audit report was completed
Audit for the BSIP area in March 2024, and will be published
online soon. Of the remaining budget, a small amount
will be used to ensure the published document is fully
accessible.
I Non-intensive services
I1 DRT (WESTLink) to 29% Amber March 2026 Changes made to service in April to ensure improved
complement network financial viability and improved service delivery.
I2 Additional BSIP Supported 24% Amber March 2026 In the process of going out to tender for a ‘South Orbital’
Services bus service linking South Bristol Hospital to Long Ashton
Park & Ride to launch in September 2024 running until
the end of March 2026. The existing BSIP Supported
Services 522 and 525 have been operational since April
2023
I3 WESTLocal Community 0% Green March 2025 Two contracted services were launched in early 2024
Initiative under Tranche 1 and applications for future services
under Tranche 2 opened in May 2024. Finalised costs and
programme are TBC.

105
Delivery Plans to March 2024 Forecast to March 2025 and Beyond
ID Description % Complete Progress RAG Targeted Progress Commentary
(March 2024) completion
date
I4 AssessWEST – Network 46% Green March 2025 Research is being led and supported by external
Re-design Programme consultants and due to report and conclude in the second
half of 2024.
Additional
Delivery (All aspects of 43% Green March 2025 Overspend on staff support is being reviewed at SRO and
support to programme) at programme level
Skills Training (drivers / 100% Green Completed The driver recruitment and retention programme closed
engineers) in April 2024 after 18 months.

106
1.4 Bus Driver Recruitment and Retention
We recognise the importance staff recruitment and retention plays in safeguarding the success bus
network across the BSIP area. A well-functioning bus network relies on having enough drivers to
operate the scheduled routes and maintain reliable services. Addressing staff shortages is therefore
fundamental in reaching wider goals for the bus network, in improving passenger satisfaction,
supporting economic activity and productivity, advocating sustainable transport, equity and
accessibility, reducing traffic congestion, safety and cost efficiency.

What we’ve done so far
In the 2022 BSIP Update, we outlined aspirations for a Driver Recruitment and Retention Project with
the aim to employ and train 140 new bus drivers across the BSIP area.
The project began in October 2022 and ran over an 18-month period, ending in April 2024. The
project was awarded £190,710 (see Table 3-1 in the BSIP document), which was spent developing a
marketing and stakeholder engagement campaign across the MCA and NSC areas.
During the project lifetime, over 300 driver vacancies were filled within the local operators.

The Marketing Campaign
The marketing campaign for the Driver Recruitment and Retention Programme was released in
October 2022 and was communicated in both digital and printed media forms. Adverts for both
campaigns boldly highlighted key messages to engage viewers, highlighting expected salary, and
opportunities for flexible working, training, and benefits of free bus travel. The campaigns targeted
both existing bus license holders and newcoming, emphasising the training and support they would
receive upon entering the profession. A focus of the campaign was to improve perception of the
career to the public and highlight the community hero aspect. Not only was this felt productive to
increase applicant numbers, but also to reposition the role and improve passenger attitudes to bus
drivers.

Digital platform
The wider Skills Connect online platform has been used to digitally advertise ‘Become a bus driver
in the West of England’. The page includes a series of videos from existing employees at different
operators to promote the benefits of working in the industry, including the ability to work flexibly to
accommodate individual needs, the support and training received and opportunities to travel further
afield to tourist destinations.
The page links users to training platforms available, which can be filtered by location, operator, and
vehicle type. The page also highlights the range of support available to individuals looking for roles,
including with Unitary Authority and the Combined Authority’s skills support services.
The website is advertised widely through a comprehensive marketing campaign including
collaborative working with the Unitary Authorities and partners. The website, and its’ support, are
publicly available and free to access, subject to eligibility criteria.

107
Printed Communications
Printed forms of media included bus stop advertisements and local press. The bus operators were
also encouraged to carry out their own marketing activity, which included wrapping their buses.

Local Partnerships
Working closely with LTAs and bus operators, the CA facilitated the engagement with local
community groups to educate and spread awareness of the roles and responsibilities bus drivers
have and encourage individuals to join the profession.
Our stakeholder engagement programme included partnering with educational institutions to
promote bus driving as a career option by attending careers fairs and workshops. For example, there
were specific engagement events with First Bus where they hosted a bus on campus with Bath Spa
University in collaboration with their Students Union to highlighted the job alongside their studies.
This picked up on the increasing cohort of student bus drivers, highlighted through the video on the
Skills Connect page with Callum.

Other Incentives
Alongside the Driver Recruitment and Retention Programme, wider intervention packages within the
MCA have supported recruitment campaigns and funding initiatives.

Good Employment Charter
The Good Employment Charter is a free tool developed by the MCA designed to support
organisations boost productivity and achieve higher growth. The tool aims to improve working
conditions in the region and focuses on seven key characteristics including Flexible Work,
Recruitment and Pay.
Bus Operators have been encouraged to engage with, and sign up to, the Good Employment Charter
so that they can access resources and support to improve their practises, plus benefit from the
marketing activity around the Good Employment Charter. As well as the learnings to improve
support and engagement with existing staff, this also helps the operators with positioning in the
region to aid recruitment.
We will continue to work with the industry to better improve practises and share knowledge and
support.

Bootcamp Training
In an innovative approach to funding, the MCA have been able to fund bus driver training through
the Mayoral Priority Skills Fund. A flexible funding stream was utilised to enable training for 50+
Passenger Carrying Vehicle (PCV) Drivers in the region, with interviews offered upfront from local
bus operators, increasing likelihood of a job following successful training.

108
What we will continue to do
Currently there is no further allocation of funds to continue, or enhance, the driver recruitment and
retention initiatives. Whilst the delivery to date has aided recruitment and retention in the region, we
would benefit from continued activity to de-risk future investment. This is heightened in importance
following the broader diversity of entrants into the sector as a result of the engagement activity
from the CA, operators and training providers. This could be delivered through ambitions such as:
• Tailored support to bus operators – support to improve practises including flexible work, pay,
inclusion etc. This will link with our regional Good Employment Charter and can be enhanced with a
tailored business support provision.
• Community engagement – building on the success of the previous activity, enhance the community
engagement offer by working collaboratively with Unitary Authorities and local partners to
highlight bus driving as a career and establish pathways.
• Unlocking future talent pathways - Engagement with schools to inspire careers in bus driving. This
will include highlighting the innovation in the sector and inspiring the next generation.
• Safety and facilities – improve facilities for staff, such as diversity training and toilets
• Testing and training – increased regional capacity which could include addressing regional
priorities such as customer service, safety and other requirements not currently met through
standard training activities.
• Sustainability – including green skills training for all operator staff. Support for new entrants –
including car driver license training prior to PCV driving, childcare provision, English language
training, workplace support etc.
• Pride in our drivers - celebrate our drivers and encourage everyone to be respectful through
marketing campaigns, create a culture of pride in WEST.

109
Appendix D
Ambitions and
Proposals for
2025-2035
110
Contents
1 Our Detailed Proposals and Ambitions 3

1.1 Service Level and Network Coverage 4

1.2 Bus Priority 7

1.3 Simpler and more affordable fares 9

1.4 Ticketing 10

1.5 Improved Waiting and Interchange 12

1.6 Improved bus information and network identity 14

1.7 Accessibility and Inclusion 15

1.8 Bus Safety 16

1.9 Bus Passenger Charter Proposals (Ongoing) 19

1.10 Improvements to our bus fleet 20

1.11 Transformational Network 21

111
1 Our Detailed Proposals and Ambitions
The following section contains the detailed proposals and ambitions under each improvement
category as outlined in Section 4 of the West of England 2024 BSIP refresh. All proposals and
ambitions listed represent our proposed outputs were further funding beyond the existing BSIP (1)
allocation to be made available to the partnership between the Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA)
and North Somerset Council (NSC) in respect of the West of England Bus Service Improvement Plan
(BSIP).
Short-term proposals from 2025/26 to 2028/29 represent schemes and approaches that we feel
could be delivered quickly by our partnership and through the current Enhanced Partnership (EP)
process. Some schemes and approaches are a continuation of initiatives delivered through the BSIP
(1) programme which have already achieved great success whilst others are new ideas that we have
developed in preparing our BSIP 2024 document. All short-term proposals will need new funding
through a future BSIP funding round to deliver and therefore still represent a set of aspirational
outputs.
Longer-term ambitions that extend out from 2025/26 to 2035 and beyond represent our aspirations
for the long term regarding local buses, the services operated, and the network provided. Most
longer-term ambitions will require our outlined short-term proposals to be delivered by 2028/29 (or
no later than 2030) as these will form the foundations for our longer-term ambitions, in particular
their financial stability and success. As with short-term proposals, there is no current funding to
provide the ambitions set out under longer-term ambitions and as such the information below
represents an aspirational outcome. Funding would be needed through future BSIP funding rounds
or any other identified funding sources.
One issue that became evident early on in delivery of the 2021 BSIP programme was the mismatch
between the three-year funding period for the 2021 BSIP capital award to NSC and the five-year
funding period for the City Region Sustainable Transport Settlements (CRSTS) to the MCA. The bus
network in our region covers both local transport authority areas and joint working between them is
well-established. BSIP capital awards for five-year periods in future will enable the benefits of a joint
approach to be fully realised. Although both areas have a track record of quick and efficient delivery,
it is inevitable that schemes involving land acquisition may take longer than the funding period
allowed.

112
1.1 Service Level and Network Coverage
Table 1-1 – Short Term Proposals to 2028/29
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Commercial Service Stretch Consolidate 2021 BSIP-funded enhancements to core Replicate the commercial success of core hours
Standards bus routes by expanding their provision outside of enhancements by stretching standards (daily span) and
core hours and on Sundays to build on earlier BSIP seeking long-term commitment from operators to these
progress with additional BSIP funding. maintain service levels.
Higher Frequency Inter-Urban Improve frequency on inter-urban and Bristol Airport To attract new bus use from private car by offering better
Links services to a minimum of two buses per hour during direct services (e.g. from Clevedon to Bristol and Weston-
daytime Mondays to Saturdays. super-Mare).
Regional Night Buses Explore and trial extended evening and night bus A foundation step for AssessWEST outcomes and could
services across the Bristol City network and key include a trial of 24/7 local bus services across key
satellite towns across the region. commercial corridors.
More Evening and Sunday Pilot more evening / Sunday buses on local town Use commercial midweek / Saturday pattern and
Buses services and core service corridors radiating from commercial partnerships with operators to kick-start future
Bristol across the BSIP area. self-funding routes.
Bristol urban corridors Seek to strengthen connections for urban Invest in new and enhanced services for the Stapleton,
package communities with fewer connections and improve Whitchurch, Hartcliffe, Brislington and St Annes areas and
services on key radial routes as a pilot. on the A38, A37, A4018 and A420 corridors.
Rural service innovation Measures to redesign remaining rural services into This will work in tandem with outputs from AssessWEST
package bus or DRT feeder services using fixed, semi-fixed, and will feed the core network.
and full DRT in eight pilot areas across the region.
North Somerset service Services to link regional towns with employment Services to link Clevedon / Portishead with Avonmouth
improvement package areas at Avonmouth with more buses on faster and Portway P&R site, faster Weston-super-Mare / Bristol
services. services and more buses on services between Weston-
super-Mare, Cheddar & Wells.
Regional town improvement Review all regional town bus provision and enhance Maximising rail interchange and providing connections
package with new ‘town services’ connecting residents with between residential areas and the inter-urban bus network.
town centres, employment areas, and rail stations.

113
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
New DRT Models Improve viability of DRT and provide additional Scope for providing additional resource to improve
resource through PSV and PHV provision as operational efficiency using an integrated approach.
appropriate to improve performance. Consider
moving to a hybrid semi-fixed DRT model.
School Bus Routes Provide subsidised school bus services for young To reduce car traffic on the school run, in line with JLTP.
people not entitled to free home-to-school transport Bus operators find commercial school services unviable
where direct travel on existing bus services is not unless higher child fares are charged. One benefit of this
possible and where there is a good level of demand. proposal would be to reduce off-peak bus service cost, but
it needs clear policy framework and a long-term funding
commitment.
Severn Beach Line package Improve cross-ticketing between bus and rail and Consider how existing or new bus-based services
coordinate existing and new bus services to rail times could connect Severn Beach station to Severnside job
along with wayfinding for onward travel. opportunities through coordinated times and fares.

Table 1-2 – Longer-Term Ambitions to 2034/35
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
A New Regional Bus Network Step-change in bus network coverage towards the AssessWEST will inform the developing network. Aligned
ultimate long-term ambition – including improved with each local transport authority’s policies, strategies, and
frequencies and daily span. plans.
metrobus to Bristol Airport ‘metrobus’ service between Bristol Airport and Bristol Aligns with regional JLTP plans. Supported by First Bus.
City Centre and new links between the airport and Study to be undertaken by Bristol Airport. Some key town
regional towns in its catchment area. links could be bus, DRT, or combination of both.
metrobus expansion corridors Develop additional ‘metrobus’ service extensions Explore opportunities set out in JLTP4 (and subsequent
from Bristol City Centre and feeder links between JLTP5) including potential metrobus extensions to
extension terminals and the wider area. Avonmouth/Severnside, Yate, Thornbury and an orbital
service expanding on the short-term orbital pilot.

114
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Service Level and Population Communities with 500+ people to have at least hourly A hierarchy of population levels will be linked to minimum
bus or DRT services (0700-1900, Mon to Sat). bus frequency standards and days / periods of operation
Better than hourly services (0700-1900, daily) for across various service types (urban radial, urban orbital,
communities and smaller satellite urban networks inter-urban, inner-circular) – this will be guided by the
serving up to 3,000 people. AssessWEST network outcomes.

Better than two buses an hour (for communities up All route types and networks could be complemented by
to 10,000 people) and more than 4 buses an hour for DRT to act as a feeder service or provide coverage during
communities over 10,000 people. non-core hours.
For conurbations we will aim for 12 buses an hour using
either individual or coordination or bus routes.
A supported service package Enhanced network coverage (including supported New/restored fixed and innovative services (such as DRT)
services). set by development patterns.
Bus friendly developments A stronger link between bus network planning Developer contributions to be sought via s106. New
and delivery and local plans to ensure bus/DRT is developments to be designed as ‘bus-friendly with DRT
embedded in new developments from first occupation. coverage considered as a first step in bus provision from
1-100 units.
Integrated corridors High frequency, 15-minute turn-up-and-go Require investment in infrastructure (see Table 1-4).
frequencies fed by strategic services and DRT.
New core bus service corridor High frequency (ultimately four buses per hour)
from Weston-super-Mare to service from Weston-super-Mare to Bristol via
Bristol Churchill, Bristol Airport and A38 with DRT links from
adjacent villages to interchange hubs.

115
1.2 Bus Priority
Table 1-3 - Short Term Proposals to 2028/29
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Continued jointly funded Completion of schemes funded jointly by BSIP and Ongoing BSIP and CRSTS funded schemes to be completed
corridor approach CRSTS streams. by c2027 and new schemes delivered from 2027. Further
BSIP funding will be ringfenced to support bus service
improvements in tandem with CRSTS (1 and 2) corridor
improvements from 2027.
Network ‘bus priority quick Review the whole network and develop a programme A package of simple / ‘quick wins’ on the network, rural
wins’ study of Delivery Packages for network improvements bus priority measures on lower frequency routes, and
to be delivered from 2028/29 or sooner (funding major schemes to tackle traffic congestion and improve bus
dependent). journey times at key locations.
Longer-term bus priority Feasibility Packages for longer-term network A series of feasibility studies spread across the region to
package improvements, especially those involving land understand the impacts of simple / ‘quick wins’ on the
acquisition. network, impacts of rural bus priority measures on lower
frequency routes, and major schemes to tackle traffic
congestion and improve bus journey times at key locations
(e.g. M5 Junction 19 and Uphill roundabout).
Bus Stop Infrastructure An approach to place all bus stops across the region Funding then targeted to provide appropriate standards for
Package into a hierarchy based on either bus or passenger each bus stop tier.
throughput.
Network systems integration Traffic signal priority and network systems integration Traffic signal priority on all bus corridors together where
across the region, focusing on principal junctions and possible, with bus gates and a roll-out / extension of yellow
town / urban centres. box junction enforcement. (e.g. complete the Scoot system
in Bath & North East Somerset). Integration of the bus lanes
and traffic signal priorities with softer measures to form a
holistic approach (e.g. parking control and enforcement (see
below)).

116
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Enforcement package Bus lane and parking enforcement. Investment in staff resources to improve enforcement of
bus stop clearways and parking restrictions on bus routes.
Review of on-street parking impacts on the bus network.
Seek powers and implement measures to enforce moving
traffic offences where not held already by local highway
authorities.
Network package Traffic management. Assess and mitigate the impact of loading and parking
provision on the network.

Table 1-4 - Longer-Term Ambitions to 2034/35
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Bus reliability on the trunk Joint working with agencies across our Trunk Road Work with National Highways to tackle congestion and
road network Network (TRN) to improve bus reliability. improve bus journey times.
High frequency service Infrastructure to support new core bus service Linked to service proposal above under Network and
infrastructure corridors (e.g. Weston-super-Mare to Bristol via Services and to include development and delivery of
Churchill, Bristol Airport and A38). interchange hubs.
Network ‘bus priority quick Delivery Packages for network improvements to be A package of simple / ‘quick wins’ on the network, rural
wins’ delivered from 2028/29. bus priority measures on lower frequency routes, and
major schemes to tackle traffic congestion and improve bus
journey times at key locations (e.g. M5 Junction 19, Uphill
roundabout, and Stone-edge Batch).
Interchange hub package Interchange Hubs and AssessWEST delivery. Delivery of mobility hubs across the bus route network
linked to AssessWEST outputs and including bus
interchanges at railway stations.
Bus lanes package Continuous bus lanes and network integration Continuous bus lanes where space allows, and congestion
Package. persists where there are six or more buses per hour.
Continued integration of existing bus lanes with parallel
infrastructure schemes to form complete network.
Future4WEST Package Future4WEST encompasses the approaches Consider the feasibility for: Bath to Bristol; South Fringe to
commonly found under mass transit. Bristol; East Fringe to Bristol; Borth Fringe to Bristol.

117
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Parking Charge Alignment To harmonise parking policies across the BSIP area. Management and pricing policies to encourage increased
bus use from car for both local and regional journeys.

1.3 Simpler and more affordable fares
Table 1-5 - Short Term Proposals to 2028/29
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Regional Fare Cap Fare Capping. Package to replace the national £2 fare cap if it ceases with
an approach better to or equal to the earlier urban and
regional fare caps (in place before January 2023), to avoid a
sharp jump to commercial fare levels.
Targeted Fares Package Targeted fares offer package (works with or instead of Free travel days used to promote specific bus services and
caps). linked to regional and local events.
Free travel weeks – used to boost bus use on target
corridors and linked with some seasonal events.
Targeted Discounts –To support use of new/improved
services or seasonal events (e.g. University start).
Bundle offers – create digital bundles for young people,
families, and 3-stop-hop style offers.
Promotional Fares Package Promotional Offers. For example, Birthday Buses and provide a larger
promotion budget to ensure this is well-understood.
Extend the job seekers offer to all those across the region in
receipt of a job offer and in receipt of job seekers allowance.
Include a programme to educate job seekers in how to use
the bus and understand bus fares.

118
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Regional Zoning Approach Regional Zoning. A package of support to level-up fare / distance differences
seen across the network and not otherwise captured by
fare capping. This will include a review of existing zones for
multi-operator fares, aiming for more equitable pricing.

Table 1-6 - Longer-Term Ambitions to 2034/35
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Long-Term Fare Capping Continued Fare Capping. We know that continued low and simple fares provide long-
term confidence in the bus network and encourage people to
make using the bus a natural choice for travel. We will work
with bus operators to develop a long-term fare capping
programme that will grow patronage at fare pricing that is
commercially sustainable.

1.4 Ticketing
Table 1-7 - Short Term Proposals to 2028/29
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
TravelWEST Improvements TravelWEST Card. Develop the TravelWEST card as a system to assist people
who are not technology literate and/or not able to use
e-ticketing or app-based systems. TravelWEST charging
points using cash to be expanded across the region and
product options to be added to this platform (including rail
in the longer-term) in addition to the WESTapp.
Regional Ticket Integration Integrate Rider and Freedom Travelpass tickets to Potential quick win. Initial scoping work carried out by
create a family of multi-operator, multi-modal tickets. Great Western Railway and Rider scheme in 2017 but
not continued. Would be paper/card tickets until digital
versions available when Project Coral completed.

119
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
DRT Through Ticketing Through ticketing between DRT and the bus network. Key aspect of delivering our regional rural strategies across
all partners.
Multi-Operator / Multi- Resolve ticket interoperability issues. Set out a programme to resolve issues where different
Product Acceptance ticketing systems cause barriers to the universal
acceptance of tickets and ticket products in smartcard or
e-ticket / app format. Identify issues and use joint-funding
solutions to mitigate issues. Include Project Coral outputs in
this work.
Targeted Bus/Rail Ticketing Through tickets from rail network onto specific bus Existing example is the through ticket to Bristol Airport via
services where appropriate. Bristol Temple Meads. Other possibilities exist across our
region (e.g. Clevedon from Yatton, and to Cheddar and Wells
from Weston-super-Mare.
Tickets onto WESTapp Add all ticket products to e-ticket / app. Once WESTapp is launched, quickly add DRT functionality
to allow journey planning and payment in addition to
area ‘Rider’ based ticket products and any other ticket or
fare promotion. This will include funding to continue the
development of WESTapp from 2025/26 to 2028/29 – a key
aspect of delivering regional rural strategies.

Table 1-8 - Longer-Term Ambitions to 2034/35
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
WESTapp Development (next WESTapp. Continue development of the WESTapp from 2028/29
phases) to include all public transport forms, including rail, all
bus operators and DRT (where not achieved before)
and sustainable travel and active travel options such as
e-scooters, e-bikes, and car-club vehicles.
Regional (all-mode) Fare Implement multi-modal, multi-operator capping. Requires output of Project Coral and co-operation of train
Capping operating companies.

120
1.5 Improved Waiting and Interchange
Table 1-9 - Short Term Proposals to 2028/29
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Bus Stop Standards Consistent bus stop standards for all bus stops A package for the implementation of bus stop design
across the region and a comprehensive review of bus guidance and standards, building on CRSTS and BSIP
stop locations. funded corridors, making allowances for parish / town
council owned assets and working with advertising
concessions across the region. We will tailor facilities
according to a bus stop hierarchy.
A Better Bus Stop Consistent standard of cleaning and maintenance for Potential funding from bus lane enforcement and
Environment bus stops and shelters and improved facilities and advertising income, we will improve and maintain to
wayfinding. consistent standards the bus stop environment with better
cleaning, maintenance, facilities, wayfinding, and safe
walking routes.
Local Bus Hubs Local Bus Hub Upgrade Package. We will identify up to 16 locations across our region where
improvements to current facilities can be made (e.g.
provision of toilets, information kiosks, facilities for bus
drivers and improved walking routes to rail stations) – one
such location will be Weston-super-Mare interchange.
Interchange corridor pilots Improve infrastructure and information as a Improve infrastructure, wayfinding, branding, and linked
combination of measures on selected routes to fare promotions and provide travel training initiatives on
monitor the impact of this approach. routes such as Thornbury to The Mall, SGS, and Southmead.
Routes to Bus Stops Improve routes to bus stops by walking and wheeling. Measures may include 20mph limits, first/last mile
improvements and rural lanes schemes. Aligned with our
regional rural strategies and active travel strategies with
associated action plans.

121
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Regional Mobility Hub North Somerset New Bus Mobility Hub Package. New mobility hubs are planned for Clevedon, Nailsea and
Upgrades MCA New Bus Hub package Portishead, with upgrades to Worle hub. Smaller hubs are
under consideration for select villages.
(part 2).
Following the delivery of 11 trial mobility hubs by 2025, we
will use the lessons learnt to help us design, implement
and operate mobility hubs in the future, using a standard
‘blueprint’.

Table 1-10 – Longer-Term Ambitions to 2034/35
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Bus Stop Review Continued review locations of all bus stops. Continue to implement bus stop standards and review/
remove stops if no longer used or move to other locations if
appropriate.
Bus Stop Shelter Policy Install shelters at all bus stops where physically 1,600 more shelters needed. New shelter to have green
possible except those that function as alighting points roofs and solar power if possible. Engage with highway
only. authorities, Town and Parish Councils on location,
specification, cleaning, and maintenance issues.
Core Route Interchange Hubs Interchange Hubs on the core bus network (existing For interchange between DRT and the core bus service (e.g.
and proposed). on A38 South corridor). Uses output of AssessWEST.

122
1.6 Improved bus information and network identity
Table 1-11 - Short Term Proposals to 2028/29
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Guides and Maps Continued delivery of comprehensive travel guides Printed information is still highly relevant. We will assess
and maps. the impact of the range of material that is being produced
with BSIP Phase 1 funding.
TravelWEST Content Further develop TravelWEST, the region’s online TravelWEST provides comprehensive public transport
Improvements information and journey planning website. information. Bus fares information will be added to
TravelWEST.
A Regional RTI Approach (part Expand RTI across the network, including a pilot Ongoing introduction of new RTI displays which will cascade
1) across rural locations. old RTI displays to more corridors in urban and suburban
areas. Ensure consistency between TravelWEST and other
RTI by using a single data source and prediction process.
Pilot RTI in rural areas across the region to understand
its impact on passenger confidence in respect of lower
frequency bus services.
E-Paper Roll-Out Expansion of e-paper displays. After a successful trial of e-paper in Thornbury we will
expand the use of these units to 50% of all remaining bus
stops where RTI is not installed. In rural areas, e-paper
displays will be solar powered where possible.
Basic Bus Stop Information Upgrading of non-digital bus stop information, Development of smart information plates will continue and
including more display cases and smart information cover all stops not treated with RTI or e-paper displays.
plates. These plates will use QR codes linked to TravelWEST
departure board lists, supported by paper displays.
Prioritised Bus Stop Increased bespoke information provision at identified Bus information at railway stations. Signposting at
Information bus stops. interchange/central locations. and to locally relevant sites.
Regional Bus Fare Fares information at bus stops and online. Through-fare capping, commitments by operators to limit
Information fare changes to specific dates and retain simplified fares.

123
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
WEST Brand (part 1) Complete rollout of the WESTbus brand on the bus Lighter touch branding for most buses, with full liveries on
network. key corridors (c50% of buses by 2028/29).
Deliver a new standard of physical and aesthetic To be rolled out as and when shelters reach the end of their
design for bus shelters in the region. service life, with vinyl stickers being applied elsewhere.
Fare offers to promote leisure Work with leisure destinations to improve bus access This will be done alongside existing fare packages and
travel and develop joint ticketing options. offers.

Table 1-12 - Longer-Term Ambitions to 2034/35
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
WEST Brand (part 2) Deliver the WEST branding across all forms of public All buses, DRT vehicles and related infrastructure in full
transport. WEST branding. Brand extended to local rail services and
stations.
A Regional RTI approach (part Sustainable Regional RTI. Electrically powered information at bus stops powered by
2) solar energy wherever possible.

1.7 Accessibility and Inclusion
Table 1-13 Short Term Proposals to 2028/29
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Free Travel for those with Free Concessionary Travel for disabled holders of Free travel at all times for holders of disabled ENCTS
disabilities ENCTS passes. passes and any companions to ensure that disabled persons
can access employment opportunities.
100% Raised Kerbs Improve accessibility to buses by creating level Ensure that every bus stop across the region has a raised
boarding and easy bus docking. kerb to enable step-free access between the waiting area
and the bus.

124
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
All Buses with Audio/Digital Bus Fleet Upgrades. Focus on ensuring that all buses across our regional
Equipment bus fleet have audio-visual next stop and information
announcements – in line with the national approach.
Bus Driver Regional Training Staff Training Package. Work with bus operators to establish a regional standard
Standard – Disability for accessibility and inclusion training, focusing not only on
Awareness physical accessibility needs and wheelchair handling but
also on hidden disabilities.
Traveller Training Independent traveller training and buddy schemes. Create a programme to better enable independent travel, or
travel with a bus buddy, for passengers who find using the
bus complex and challenging.

Table 1-14 Longer-Term Ambitions to 2034/35
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Networkwide accessibility Consistency of bus stop, interchange, and bus station A package to ensure that by 2034/35 all bus network assets
facilities. have consistent levels of accessibility and facilities to
support people with a range of needs.
Bikes on Buses Trial of cycle carriage on rural buses. To encourage active travel and leisure travel.

1.8 Bus Safety
Table 1-15 Short Term Proposals to 2028/29
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Bus Passenger Safety Implement recommendations of Bus Passenger Safety Embed recommendations from the Bus Passenger Safety
Audit across the region and work with the public to Audit into the EP Scheme. This would make the completion
better understand their concerns and fears on using of bus stop and walking route audits a requirement for
the bus. highway authorities to carry out across their areas.

125
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Bus Stop Safety Audits Undertake safety audits at all bus stops across the All bus stops in the BSIP area to be assessed, including
BSIP area during daylight & darkness. during the hours of darkness where appropriate, to assess
safety issues, including walking routes to stops. Aligned
with regional rural strategies and active travel strategies
with associated action plans.
Safer Bus Stop Design Produce design guidance tailored to different Provide tailored approaches specific to the region and
geographical contexts. tackle discrepancies in bus stop and station infrastructure
throughout the bus network (linked to bus stop design
standards).
Regional Help Points Introduce Help Points at bus stops in city and isolated The installation of Help Points with 24-hour access which
suburban/rural areas. provide both ‘Information’ and ‘Emergency’ functions to
benefit both tourists and locals in case of emergency.
Bus Stop Wayfinding Better distribution of wayfinding signage and use of Clear and illuminated signage enhances the overall
backlit illumination. experience for pedestrians and commuters, making it easier
and more enjoyable to navigate the area.
A Safer Travel Partnership Enhance collaboration across the bus network Clearly establish clear roles and the duties of each
between the local transport authorities, local highway stakeholder in ensuring the safety and security of the
authorities, bus operators, the West of England bus network and outline protocols for collaboration and
Women’s Commission, and the police. information sharing. Address discrepancies in defining
sexual harassment ranging from low-level to severe
incidents to ensure cohesive responses and support
systems. Set up a safer travel partnership modelled on
other successful partnerships across England.
Bus Driver Regional Training Standardise training programmes for all staff across Train staff to ensure they are equipped with skills to
Standard – Passenger and the bus network and implement bus driver support handle incidents involving passengers with sensitivity and
Driver Safety programmes to help safeguard their well-being. empathy, in aim of achieving greater confidence for staff and
sense of security for passengers. Provide training to staff
responsible for managing incident reporting to ensure the
procedure is more streamlined. Provide post event support.

126
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Security Alert and Response Establish consistent response procedures and This will provide uniform response procedures and facilitate
classifications. a clear understanding of when police involvement is
necessary and will include the utilisation of "blue code" and
"red code".
Passenger Safety Education Roll out an education and awareness campaign Passengers will be well-equipped to report incidents. These
with easily understandable materials outlining how materials should be available in various languages and
passengers can report incidents and safety concerns. formats, such as posters, brochures, and digital platforms.
Also set up a single number or short text code to allow
anonymous reporting of violent, anti-social, or sexual
harassment by passengers.

Table 1-16 - Longer-Term Ambitions to 2034/35
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Bus Stop Security CCTV and adequate lighting to be installed at bus Currently, operators have only commitment to consider
stations, bus stops (where appropriate) and on all fitting CCTV to new buses.
operators’ buses.
Incident Log Establish a centralised system for collecting and This will enable comprehensive analysis, proactive decision-
sharing incident data. making, and evidence-led interventions.
Incident Reporting Make reporting incidents convenient and accessible This will be built into wider longer-term WESTapp
for passengers via digital platforms, such as development already noted.
WESTapp and ensure they are user-friendly.

127
1.9 Bus Passenger Charter Proposals (Ongoing)
Table 1-17 Proposals from 2025/26
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Bus Passenger Charter Place a greater emphasis on PSED (public sector Duty to take reasonable measures to make wheelchair
Update equality duty) and accessibility. spaces accessible to wheelchair users, and the right for
passengers to bring an assistance dog on board. This is in
line with updated BSIP guidance.
Make the path to achieving 95% punctuality clearer. Yearly targets are provided in the Enhanced Partnership, to
be included in the Charter.
Include WESTlink DRT services in the Charter and This is in line with updated BSIP guidance, which requires a
make expectations clear. 20-minute window for buses to arrive on a flexible service.
Make fare information available on all buses and offer Also ensure this information is at bus stops and stations.
the best possible fare.
Use the Charter to establish a single point of contact Ensure any complaint or comment is tracked through the
for complaints. chain and the passenger receives a response.
Use the Charter to ensure early consultation on Ensure bus operators consult with affected communities
network/bus changes. (including citizen panels and bus champions) prior to
the start of the 70-day notice period for service changes
through the Traffic Commissioner.

128
1.10 Improvements to our bus fleet
Table 1-18 - Short Term Proposals to 2028/29
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Rolling Out Electric Buses Support ZEBRA 2 implementation. Support the implementation of electric buses across the
region through funding awarded to us by the DfT ZEBRA
(2) funding programme, working closely with First Bus and
energy providers to manage the programme.
Delivery More Zero-Emission Actively seek further investment for transition to Provides a foundation for us to continue to aim for a stretch
Buses zero-emission bus fleet. target of 2030 for fully zero-emission fleet. This is aligned
with regional local transport authority Climate Emergency
Action Plans.

Table 1-19– Longer Term Ambitions to 2034/35
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Long-Term Bus Fleet Continued fleet investment. By 2035 or earlier, 100% of vehicles will be zero emission.
Investment We will install 20 ultra-fast 500amp electric vehicle
chargers at strategic locations throughout the region
including interchanges, layovers, and park and ride sites.
Hydrogen Fuel Exploration Use of other ZEV fuel types. Working with partner operators and the wider fuel
distribution network, we will investigate the ability to
operate hydrogen fuel-cell buses across our network.

129
1.11 Transformational Network
Table 1-20 - Short Term Proposals to 2028/29
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
Our EP+ option and/or The MCA and NSC to carry out preliminary work to The MCA and NSC remain committed to the enhanced
Franchising – a future option? consider alternative network planning, management partnership (EP) process but want to be prepared to follow
and delivery options that may include our version up an alternative if the EP is unable to deliver substantial
of EP+ or an assessment of the franchising process, progress towards the high-level objectives in the BSIP and
costs, and potential outcomes. EP Plan. Under current legislation, would need approval
from Secretary of State to make franchising powers
available to NSC, or both NSC and the MCA acting jointly. It
is noted that the MCA already has powers to progress itself
with franchising.
Formula for Success – Continued focus on quality. Getting the basics right, finding and delivering ‘quick wins’
building the foundations for and growing passenger use further.
longer-term ambitions Continued focus on core buses. Nurturing the core bus network using our already
successful formula of enhanced service support funding.
High Quality Interchange. Establish a network of high-quality interchanges as a first
step to realising AssessWEST outcomes.
Toolkit Approach. Continue to combine funding streams to maximise the
benefits that joint working can deliver.

130
Table 1-21– Longer Term Ambitions to 2034/35
SCHEME TITLE PROPOSAL COMMENT
The Best Bus Network ‘Best Passenger Experience’. Continued project coordination, quicker decision making,
and continued policy linkage with JLTP (4 & 5).
A single unified network. Development of mass transit approaches under a single
brand and delivery model.
Network consolidation and capacity. Comprehensive, connected and regionally equitable network
that removes transport poverty and provides sufficient bus
depot capacity to enable growth to be met.
Simple and cost effective. TOTO network wide and integration on all forms
underpinned by simple, low, and capped fares.
Innovation in technology. A national testbed for practical and more advanced
technology including autonomous vehicles.
Demand Management Consider introduction of demand management Consistent with policy approach in JLTP5 to tackle climate
Measures measures (e.g. workplace parking levy) to encourage emergency.
a move to bus from private transport forms and fund
improvements to bus services.

131
