Transport - West of England Combined Authority Skip to Main Content Left Mayoral Combined Authority 
TravelWEST 
Skills Connect 
Growth Hub 
Invest Bristol & Bath 

Next 

Toggle Search 
Menu 

For residents 
For businesses 
Mayor 
About us About the Combined Authority 
Together, we’re creating a better, greener future for all our residents.

Who we are The Mayor 
Committee 
Senior Leadership Team 
Business Board 
Careers 
Contact us 
Events 

Our strategy West of England Growth Strategy 
Regional insights 
Transport Vision 
Get West of England Working Plan 
Business Plan 

Democracy, funding and transparency 2025 election 
Financial Information 
Funding 
Procurement 
Register of interest 
Democracy and decision making 
Meetings 
Notice of decisions 
Constitution 

What we do What we do 
Together, we’re creating a better, greener future for all our residents.

Employment and skills 
Innovation 
Planning and housing 

Business support 
Environment 
Transport 

News 
Open Search 

Search for: Search 

Home 
What we do 
current page Transport 

Transport
As the regional transport authority, we are improving transport including buses, trains, walking and cycling.

We are changing how people travel around our region, with more journeys by public transport, walking and cycling. We're making transport more reliable, affordable, enjoyable and safe.

West of England Transport Vision
We need a transport system that people can trust – seamlessly linking the region together.
High-quality transport is vital to powering the future prosperity of our region and improving people’s quality of life. 
From better buses and more trains to increased connectivity and improved streets and places, discover our vision for a better-connected West of England.
Discover our transport vision 

Buses 
To meet our ambitious 2030 net zero target we need better public transport. We are working to improve bus services, so that we have a greener, better connected transport network for our residents.

Image credit: Visit Bath 
Rail 
We’re funding a new entrance at Bristol Temple Meads, a key regional transport hub, making it easier for passengers to get around the city and improving connectivity in the West of England region.

Walking and cycling 
We recognise that encouraging more walking and cycling will help us build a healthier and greener West of England, and are investing in improvements to walking and cycling infrastructure.

The future of transport

Transport Corridors 
Working with local councils to improve transport across our region.

Future Transport Zone 
We’ve committed £4 million to trial new ways of moving around the region.

West of England Regional Transport Model 
Enabling a better understanding of movements throughout the region.

Our plans and strategies

Transport Delivery Plan 
Setting out the transport projects (2021-2026) planned for the West of England region.

Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan 
A detailed plan that identifies that over £400m of investment is needed to provide high quality infrastructure for walking and cycling across the region.

Joint Local Transport Plan 
Connecting people and places for a vibrant, inclusive and carbon neutral West of England.

Sustainable Transport Settlement 
We have submitted our proposals for a transport settlement from Government to help us achieve our net zero carbon targets and transform the way people travel across the region.

Bus Service Improvement Plan 
The Bus Service Improvement Plan proposes an enhanced partnership with bus operators to improve the quality and coverage of the region’s bus network.

Image credit: Visit Bath 
10-year rail delivery plan 
We have plans to transform travel by rail over the next 10 years, including new rail routes, step-free access at stations and more frequent ‘turn up and go’ services.

Bus strategy 
The bus strategy considers options to improve the bus network and set out how further growth in bus usage can be encouraged, including proposals to create better, faster, more reliable and more accessible services across the region.

Electric Vehicle Charging Action Plan 
Our plan outlines how we'll deliver new electric vehicle charging infrastructure across the West of England.

Bus Grant Delivery Plan 
Our Bus Grant Delivery Plan builds on the targets and work we have been doing through our Bus Service Improvement Plan (BSIP).

Network North maintenance reporting

Following the reallocation of HS2 funding, the West of England Combined Authority was awarded additional funds to be spent on maintenance work. This funding was then allocated to the three local highway authorities within the region.
Read the Network North details 

Media queries
comms@westofengland-ca.gov.uk 

Keep up to date:
X click to open in a new window Linkedin click to open in a new window YouTube click to open in a new window Facebook click to open in a new window 

For residents 
For businesses 
Contact us 
Careers 
News 
Events 
About us West of England Mayor 
Who we are 
Our strategy 
Committee 
Democracy, funding and transparency 

What we do Employment and skills 
Business support 
Innovation 
Planning and housing 
Transport 
Environment 

Cookie policy 
Privacy notice 
Sitemap 
West of England Mayoral Combined Authority: Accessibility statement 

© 2026 West of England Combined Authority | All Rights Reserved 

Top
