Feasibility Study Report for a WPL
Scheme in Bristol

Submission by Nottingham City Council on behalf of
Bristol City Council

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |0
Table of Contents
Table of Contents ...................................................................................................................1
1.0 Foreword ...........................................................................................................................3
2.0 Executive Summary .........................................................................................................4
3.0 Background ......................................................................................................................5
4.0 Methodology .....................................................................................................................8
5.0 Deliverables ....................................................................................................................10
5.1 Key Stages and Activities..........................................................................................10
5.1.1 (WS1.0) Stage One: Scheme Development – Outline Business Case (OBC) ......11
5.1.2 (PM1.0) Stage One Project Management – Outputs .............................................15
5.1.3 (WS2.0) Stage Two: Public Consultation and Approval ........................................16
5.1.4 (PM2.0) Project Management – Outputs ...............................................................18
5.1.5 (WS3.0) Stage Three: Implementation and Operation ..........................................19
5.1.6 (PM3.0) Project Management – Outputs ...............................................................21
5.2 Milestones and External Dependencies ...................................................................23
5.3 Data Analysis and Quality Assurance of the Atkins Study ....................................26
5.3.1 Description of Methodology ...................................................................................26
5.3.2 Analysis/Critique ....................................................................................................27
5.3.3 Estimate on Potential Income ................................................................................29
5.4 Governance and Project Team Structure.................................................................32
5.4.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................32
5.4.2 Governance ...........................................................................................................32
5.4.3 Governance Team Structure .................................................................................33
5.4.4 WPL Project Team.................................................................................................33
5.4.5 Internal (Bristol City Council) WPL Project Team Structure ..................................34
5.4.6 External (non-Bristol City Council) Project Team Structure ...................................36
5.5 Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan ............................38
5.5.1 Stakeholder Management Strategy .......................................................................38
5.5.2 Communications Plan ............................................................................................42
5.5.3 Communications Responsibilities ..........................................................................45
5.6 Risk Analysis for Bristol City Council’s Readiness to Progress Ahead of Stage
One………………………………………………………………………………………………...47
5.6.1 Introduction to Project Risk Management ..............................................................47
5.6.2 What is Project Risk Management?.......................................................................47
5.6.3 Issue Management versus Risk Management.......................................................47
5.6.4 Opportunities and Threats .....................................................................................48
5.6.5 Risk Considerations in the Proposal and Approval Phase ....................................48

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |1
5.6.6 Project Risk Management Process........................................................................48
5.6.7 Methodology ..........................................................................................................48
5.6.8 Summary of Risk Analysis .....................................................................................50
6.0 Conclusion and Recommendations for Action ...........................................................52
7.0 Appendices.....................................................................................................................54
7.1 Appendix A: Bristol Key Terms Glossary ................................................................54
7.2 Appendix B: WPL Glossary .......................................................................................56
7.3 Appendix C: WPL Route Map ....................................................................................58
7.4 Appendix D: Milestones and Dependencies Timeline ............................................59
7.5 Appendix E: Timeline for a Bristol WPL Scheme ....................................................60
7.6 Appendix F: Governance and Project Team Structure ...........................................61
7.8 Appendix G: Stakeholder Radar ...............................................................................62
7.9 Appendix H: 2X2 Power/Influence by Interest in WPL Matrix ................................63
7.10 Appendix I: Risk Register ........................................................................................64
7.11 Appendix J: Recommendations..............................................................................72

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |2
1.0 Foreword

In March 2021, Nottingham City Council were asked by Bristol City Council to conduct
a Feasibility Study to assess their readiness to develop a Workplace Parking Levy
(WPL) scheme. I am pleased to offer this Feasibility Study Report as the result of that
agreement. Inside you will find a tailor-made WPL Route Map and a wealth of guidance
on implementing a cost effective, timely and low risk WPL scheme in Bristol.
Climate change is playing an ever-increasing part in decision making across society
and nowhere more so than in local government, with around 230 local authorities
declaring a climate crisis. Consequently, air quality and congestion are also coming
under greater public scrutiny and we are pleased that more councils across the UK
are considering implementing a WPL, as it is a proven way of constraining congestion
growth and providing the financial resources for a step change in sustainable
transport.
Bristol City Council have already shown strong leadership on sustainability with their
One City Plan and I am excited by the proposals the plan sets out, particularly in the
field of transport. Following the production of this Feasibility Study Report, I am sure
that a WPL would be a major milestone on Bristol City Council’s journey towards their
goal of ensuring that Bristol is a well-connected city with transport that is efficient,
sustainable and inclusive by 2050.
As the only UK local authority to have introduced a WPL, Nottingham City Council is
uniquely placed to share our skills and experience on WPL scheme development and
implementation. We are always keen to work with other local authorities, particularly
when it comes to carbon reduction projects, and I would be delighted to have the
opportunity to expand on how we can provide assistance throughout the process if
Bristol City Council decide to progress further along the WPL Route Map.
For now though, I hope you enjoy reading the report and that it provides further insight
into how Bristol City Council can introduce a WPL in the shortest possible time frame,
cost effectively and at the lowest possible risk.

Jason Gooding
Head of Parking, Fleet and Transport Operations
Nottingham City Council

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |3
2.0 Executive Summary

The following Feasibility Study Report is submitted as non-statutory guidance on the
process for developing and seeking approval for implementing a WPL scheme in
Bristol city centre. The report refers to statutory guidance as set out in the Transport
Act 2000, which is the guiding primary legislation for congestion charging schemes.
The report will reduce risk associated with any WPL development by suggesting areas
where Bristol City Council should look to replicate Nottingham City Council’s WPL and
where there is scope to define unique, specific elements in line with local objectives
and conditions.
The implementation of the WPL Route Map (Appendix C) will deliver key stages of the
WPL scheme development process in a structured, timely manner which will result in
an operational WPL in Bristol at the lowest cost and risk, while maintaining standards.
Appendix J contains a list of recommendations with suggested actions that will further
aid Bristol City Council in its progression towards a WPL. These recommendations
have been formulated as part of an in-depth programme of work, including
engagement and workshops held with senior officers from Bristol City Council.
The following key deliverables have been produced as part of this Feasibility Study:
1. A WPL Route Map that outlines the key stages and activities required to
achieve the target “go live” date.
2. Specialist advice and recommendations resulting from a thorough review of the
Atkins Study
3. A WPL Governance and Project Team Structure that would assist Bristol City
Council’s preparation for the delivery of the WPL Route Map
4. A Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan
5. A Risk Register that assesses Bristol City Council’s readiness for the delivery
of the WPL Route Map
There are an extensive amount of studies and supporting information available (Bus
Back Better, ICTF, JLTP 4, CAZ, One City Plan etc.) to Bristol City Council which will
all contribute to the development of a robust WPL Business Case. These pieces of
work have been completed or are close to completion.
The work undertaken evidences that Bristol City Council has an ambitious vision of
what it would like to achieve and a clear strategy that outlines the plans to deliver this.
Following the guidance within this report could achieve a WPL scheme “go live” date
of October 2024.
It is the belief of Nottingham City Council that Bristol City Council is well positioned to
progress to the delivery of Stage One of the WPL Route Map.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |4
3.0 Background

The following chapter provides a brief overview of why Bristol City Council are
considering a WPL scheme, what a WPL is and a case study of the performance to
date of Nottingham’s WPL.
Bristol
Bristol City Council, under the leadership of the elected Mayor, has an ambitious One
City Plan which is built around six core themes, all of which are underpinned by the
UN Sustainable Development Goals.
A key theme of the One City Plan is transport, where the vision is to ensure that “By
2050, everyone will be well-connected with digital services and transport that is
efficient, sustainable and inclusive; supporting vibrant local neighbourhoods and a
thriving city centre.”1
Bristol Labour’s most recent manifesto made some major pledges linked to transport
and air quality:

• “Deliver a mass transit system: This will be in the form of both an underground
and an overground – as well as expanding and improving our existing
infrastructure – connecting people to one another, jobs, and opportunity”
• “Better buses: Double the frequency and improve the reliability of existing bus
journeys through the Bus Deal and increase the number of routes so more
areas are served.”2
The manifesto also states:

• “We want to connect people to jobs, opportunity, and leisure. Over the last five
years, we’ve delivered a Clean Air Zone, a fleet of bio-gas buses, and laid
foundations for a mass transit system. With your support, we will deliver the
mass transit system, make our streets safer, and put walking and cycling as the
forefront of our transport policy”
• “Under a Labour council, Bristol will also provide free travel for apprentices and
students under-25”
• “Expand the number of Park and Ride sites”
• “Deliver a Clean Air Zone that charges non-compliant vehicles in the centre of
town”
• “Roll out at least two Liveable Neighbourhood pilots – with a view to expanding
it”
• “Deliver a London-style one-touch integrated ticketing system so that your ticket
can be used across different types of public transport”

1 One City Plan 2020 - link
2 Labour Bristol – 2021 Manifesto - link

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |5
• “Provide more on-street bike hangers throughout the city”2
The prevailing issues of poor air quality and congestion that are faced by most core
cities apply to Bristol too and they are a significant threat, not only to the health of
Bristol’s citizens and visitors but also to the vibrancy of the local economy. Research
conducted by analysts INRIX showed that Bristol was the UK’s third worst city for
congestion with a commuter losing on average 103 hours in queues last year.3 Bristol
City Council have therefore set themselves the target of becoming carbon neutral by
2025 and for the city of Bristol to be carbon neutral by 2030.4

Bristol City Council will be implementing a CAZ in summer 2022 in order to bring air
pollution levels across Bristol city centre in line with national targets set by central
government. Over the past ten years, the city of Bristol has seen a 4.6% reduction in
carbon dioxide emissions released through road transport, compared to a core city
average of 5.28%;5 this shows that additional measures are required to tackle the
levels of emissions across the city and to improve air quality at pace.

Bristol’s JLPT4 sets out a vision of high quality, sustainable public transport
infrastructure and the proposed JLTP5 will look to build on that progress. For JLTP5
to be viable, it is important to identify measures that could deliver a direct and reliable
local funding stream to support these aspirations, which could also be used as match
funding to generate further significant inward investment. One viable funding stream
to deliver this vision is a WPL scheme.
Workplace Parking Levy
The Transport Act 2000 (as amended) contains the legal authority to introduce a WPL
scheme and one of the fundamental requirements is that revenue raised by a WPL is
ring-fenced for local transport policies.6
Specifically, the Transport Act 2000 Road User Charging and Workplace Parking Levy
Explanatory Note, states:
“The Act enables local traffic authorities outside London to introduce road user
charging and workplace parking levies to help tackle congestion and use the
revenue to directly or indirectly facilitate local transport policy goals of the
licensing authority.”

Not all elements of WPL schemes are determined in detail by the Transport Act 2000.
There is substantial scope for local decision making on how a WPL can operate, which

3 Bristol Post – Bristol ranked in UK’s bottom three for traffic jams - link
4 Bristol City Council – Mayor’s Climate Emergency Action Plan 2019 - link; Bristol One City – One City Climate

Strategy - link
5 UK local authority and regional carbon dioxide emissions national statistics, Department for Business, Energy

and Industrial Strategy - link
6 Transport Act 2000, Section 179 - link

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |6
is why there is a need for a clear and comprehensive approach to scheme delivery,
as outlined in this report.
Case Study - Nottingham
Nottingham City Council is the only local authority in the UK to have implemented and
operated a WPL scheme. Nottingham’s WPL has been operational since 2012 and
some of its achievements are listed below:

• Over £83 million direct revenue generated
• Levered in an additional £200 million in grants or prudential borrowing for
improvements to the electric bus fleet, by using WPL revenue to match fund
• Winner of the 2017 Ashden award for Clean Air in Towns and Cities
• Constrained forecasted congestion growth by 47%
• A 5.79% reduction in average total transport emissions since 2012
The WPL has also allowed Nottingham City Council to acquire additional funding from
central government and together this has been invested in:

• A £570m tram line expansion, transforming a single line into a network with
17km more track. NET Phase Two alone serves around 1,800 workplaces
• £60m for the regeneration of Nottingham Station, delivering a 21st century
transport hub
• Support to the Linkbus network which connects key employment sites,
Nottingham’s two major hospitals, the two universities, East Midlands Airport
and the city centre
• The Citycard Cycles scheme – a citywide bike share solution
• The world’s largest fleet of bio-gas double decker buses
• One of the largest fleets of electric buses in Europe
• Providing grants of up to £25,000 to employers for cycle shelters, showers,
cycle infrastructure and safety equipment, the purchase of electric bicycles and
electric cargo bikes, etc.
Nottingham City Council’s significant investment in transport decarbonisation enabled
it to be the first local authority in England and Wales to gain central government
approval for its Local Air Quality Management Plan, critically without the need for a
CAZ.
The measures taken by Nottingham City Council have seen the city’s carbon dioxide
emissions fall by a quarter since 2015; much of this is a direct result of modal shift and
a significantly reduced number of car journeys. Due to the progress made so far, the
political leadership in Nottingham has set the city the target of becoming the UK’s first
carbon neutral city by 2028.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |7
4.0 Methodology

The following chapter outlines the various activities and workshops conducted by the
Nottingham City Council project team which contributed to the formation of the
Feasibility Study.
It was agreed that project work would commence in May 2021 and would be completed
and delivered to Bristol City Council for sign-off at the end of August 2021.
The scope of works and key workstreams to be delivered to Bristol City Council are
finalised in this Feasibility Study Report. The report focuses on assessing the
preparedness of Bristol City Council to start the formal process of delivering its own
WPL scheme.
The following key deliverables have been produced as part of this Feasibility Study:
1. A WPL Route Map that outlines the key stages and activities required to
achieve the target “go live” date
2. Specialist advice and recommendations resulting from a thorough review of the
Atkins Study
3. A WPL Governance and Project Team Structure that would assist Bristol City
Council’s preparation for the delivery of the WPL Route Map
4. A Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan
5. A Risk Register that assesses Bristol City Council’s readiness for the delivery
of the WPL Route Map
In the project proposal a number of different tasks were agreed between Nottingham
City Council and Bristol City Council. The aim of these tasks was to provide bespoke
information and knowledge transfer to Bristol City Council, while also providing
Nottingham City Council with key Bristol City Council specific information to enable the
formation of a tailored WPL Route Map. To gain more knowledge for inclusion in this
report, the following workshops were conducted:

• A stakeholder and communications workshop was held on 14th May 2021. The
Nottingham City Council project team met with Bristol City Council’s Head of
City Transport and Principal Transport Planner. The Nottingham City Council
project team reviewed the Stakeholder Radar (Appendix G) and the 2x2
Power/Influence by Interest in WPL Matrix (Appendix H), with the officers from
Bristol City Council providing feedback and providing details of additional
stakeholders which they felt should be included
• A second workshop focusing on milestones and dependencies was held on
19th May 2021. The Nottingham City Council project team met with Bristol City
Council’s Head of City Transport and Principal Transport Planner to identify key
national and local events that could impact on the delivery of a WPL scheme
and therefore would be necessary to monitor and manage if Bristol City Council
were to go ahead with scheme development. At this workshop, the Bristol City

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |8
Council officers requested a high level three year Timeline for a Bristol WPL
Scheme (Appendix E) that outlines the key workstreams from the WPL Route
Map
• A third workshop focusing on risk management was held on 16th July 2021.
Nottingham City Council prepared a Risk Register which consisted of possible
events or scenarios that could pose a risk to Bristol City Council commencing
Stage One of the WPL Route Map. The risk register was shared and discussed
with officers from Bristol City Council. All the risks were reviewed and suitable
actions were identified that would mitigate the risks as far as possible. The
Bristol City Council Risk Register is included at Appendix I and is discussed in
greater detail in Section 5.6
• The Nottingham City Council project team also held ‘catch up’ calls at the
request of the Principal Transport Planner from Bristol City Council to provide
updates on the Feasibility Study and to gain input from Bristol City Council as
the project progressed
• Additional meetings were held between the Nottingham City Council project
team and other internal specialists who have all contributed to the production
of this Feasibility Study Report and shaped the deliverables

To continue the progress made within this Feasibility Study Report, there are a number
of recommendations made throughout the document and summarised in Appendix J
which would assist Bristol City Council to swiftly progress to Stage One of the WPL
Route Map.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |9
5.0 Deliverables

The following chapter details the work that has been undertaken so far by Nottingham
City Council on the key workstreams and includes all relevant outputs, along with
referencing accompanying appendices.
The chapter also informs Bristol City Council of the scale and scope of the work to be
undertaken to deliver their own WPL scheme and recommends areas for prioritisation
to ensure a smooth transition to Stage One of the WPL Route Map.

5.1 Key Stages and Activities
The WPL Route Map outlines the key workstreams which are required to be completed
in order for Bristol City Council to successfully implement a WPL scheme. The
following section sets out the detail behind the WPL Route Map.
An essential part of the preparation for introducing a WPL is to understand the scale
and complexity of the project, the different workstreams involved and the necessary
skills, experience, resources and budget that will be required. Understanding these
fundamentals will ensure that the project is sufficiently resourced, robustly managed
and the expected milestones and outcomes are achieved.
Based upon Nottingham City Council’s experience, the WPL project can be split into
three main stages:

• Stage One: Scheme Development and Outline Business Case (OBC)
• Stage Two: Public Consultation, Final Business Case (FBC) and Scheme
Approval
• Stage Three: Implementation and Operation

Using a proven project management approach and experienced resources is essential
for a project of this importance, scale and risk, as this will ensure that the costs, quality
and expected timescales for the project are maintained and achieved.
The knowledge transfer of the key elements of the WPL Route Map to the Bristol City
Council project team will be critical once Bristol City Council approve and assign the
necessary resources for the WPL Project Team structure (see Section 5.4). The
establishment of a WPL Project Team, in particular the project management
resources, will enable the adoption of Bristol City Council’s preferred project
management methodology (such as PRINCE2 or Association for Project Management
[APM]) and subsequent suite of project management products, which are all
necessary to allow Bristol City Council to commence the initiation of Stage One of the
WPL Route Map.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 10
5.1.1 (WS1.0) Stage One: Scheme Development – Outline Business Case
(OBC)

Stage One of the WPL Route Map requires the commissioning and utilisation of
relevant studies and modelling to create a foundation to justify introducing a WPL
scheme in Bristol. The findings should be concentrated to inform the production of a
robust and detailed OBC, underpinning the implementation of a Bristol City Council
WPL scheme.
Stage One of the WPL Route Map sets out the five workstreams which will inform the
OBC:
(WS1.1) Supporting Studies/Information
Following reviews of the “question and answer” responses provided by Bristol City
Council Officers in September 2020, the Atkins Study and discussions held between
Nottingham City Council and Bristol City Council, it is clear that Bristol City Council
already have extensive information and supporting studies on key areas such as
economic factors, transport, congestion, air quality, deprivation and social
inclusion/exclusion, which will all contribute towards an OBC. However, some of the
information obtained (e.g. the Atkins Study) is now out of date and may need
updating.7
It is important to review all studies to ensure that the facts and figures that will be used
in an OBC are up to date, comprehensive and relevant to the project objectives. Where
this is found to not be the case, consideration should be given to the commissioning
of further studies that will support the production of a comprehensive and coherent
OBC by the end of Stage One.
Recommendation R1 – Review relevant economic, transport, congestion, air quality,
deprivation and social inclusion/exclusion studies and ensure that they are up to date
Recommendation R2 – Assess the need to commission new studies where
information in current studies is out of date
(WS1.2) Measures and Monitoring
The Atkins Study provides a good start in determining the potential number of
workplace parking places (WPPs) there are in the Bristol City Council Central Core,
Expanded Central Core and Citywide areas. However, as stated already, this data is
historic and it is essential that there is up to date, robust quantitative and qualitative
data available to assess the proposed scope and impacts of a WPL scheme. A robust
dataset will enable effective modelling and scheme development to be undertaken in
Stage One and will ensure that any risks regarding impacts or income are considered
and mitigated at an early stage of the project.

7 Atkins: Bristol Workplace Parking Levy Scoping Study, February 2011

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 11
Conducting an OSPA to formulate a dataset which provides an early understanding of
the “make-up” of employers (type, size, location) and the estimated number of WPPs
in Bristol is key, as this information will provide a clear baseline for scheme
development and will inform key internal decisions on what will be included in the draft
Bristol City Council WPL scheme design (i.e. exemptions, discounts, level of charge,
etc.)
The data can also be linked to other council data sources such as the Local Land and
Property Gazetteer and Geographical Information System; this link will ensure that
information on all known employers is captured and maintained, establishing an early
and dynamic database of employers which is necessary for the licensing and
compliance phases. It is also important to ensure that all data gathered is General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) compliant.
Due to the importance of comprehensive and current data and its impact on the
successful implementation of a WPL, it is recommended that further parking studies
are carried out to bring the information contained within the Atkins Study up to date
and to populate some of the information missing from the final report.
Nottingham City Council is able to conduct a desktop parking exercise using multiple
regression analysis to estimate how many WPPs Bristol may have. The exercise uses
real time data from Nottingham’s unique WPL Licensing System to estimate how many
potential liable workplace parking places (LWPPs) another local authority may have,
based on the relationships between a number of variables and the number of licensed
LWPPs for employers in Nottingham. Once a study is conducted, it will be necessary
to update and refine the results periodically throughout the development and
implementation stages of the project; this will ensure that the datasets and estimates
are up to date and reflective of the current local economic climate.
Recommendation R3 – Carry out an OSPA to understand the “make-up” of
employers and form a baseline dataset for scheme development
Recommendation R4 – Commission Nottingham City Council to conduct a desktop
parking exercise using multiple regression analysis and based on Nottingham’s live
WPL Licensing System, to estimate how many LWPPs Bristol may have
(WS1.3) Modelling
It will be necessary for Bristol City Council to demonstrate how a WPL scheme will
contribute towards the delivery of its plans and priorities for the city (e.g. One City
Plan, Strategic Corridors, ICTF, air quality and congestion). Fundamentally, it is
expected that the focus of modelling should be on the financial, transport and
economic impacts of a WPL, although there may be other modelling considerations.
The objectives and content of the WECA’s JLTP5 must be included while also
addressing other priorities and objectives that are regarded as key to the future
success of the city of Bristol, Bristol City Council’s wider administrative area and the
greater Bristol region. It is essential that modelling shows the full extent of the impact

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 12
and benefits that are expected to be delivered as part of the introduction of a WPL
scheme and the investment in the Bristol City Council WPL Package (see WS1.5).
Recommendation R5 – Model the transport, financial and economic elements of the
WPL scheme to illustrate how it would operate and fund future transport projects
(WS1.4) WPL Scheme Development
As identified in WS1.2 above, establishing robust datasets on employers and the
estimated number of WPPs will be necessary to assist in the outline WPL scheme
design (i.e. proposed exemptions, discounts, charging, income generation, business
support etc.). The data will also be an essential part of the Stakeholder Management
Strategy and Communications Plan as the scheme progresses and gains momentum.
It will be important for the datasets and scheme design to show how the WPL will fit
into the delivery of the wider transport vision of Bristol and the WECA through the
JLTP5 and One City Plan. Outline detail will be sought from key stakeholders as part
of the stakehol
der engagement process (see Section 5.5) and it is necessary to ensure that Bristol
City Council’s WPL scheme principles are outlined at the earliest stage.
A clear set of principles will result in consistent and robust guidance being issued by
Bristol City Council to employers and other key stakeholders, as well as ensuring that
any decisions on potential benefits (e.g. applying discounts to certain types or sizes of
employers) and impacts (e.g. estimated charge per LWPP) are identified and
undertaken in an informed and evidence based manner. The scheme principles will
be a key component of the Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications
Plan for early informal stakeholder engagement as part of Stage One of the WPL
Route Map and in advance of the public consultation workstream in Stage Two.
It will be important to develop and maintain a risk management strategy during Stage
One. A Risk Register should be created, assigned to a project team member to
regularly update and to add new risks and mitigations for identified risks. The WPL
Project Team should look to review the Risk Register regularly, with the document
owner flagging any new risks or confirming when risks are closed.
During WS1.4, attention should be given to starting to develop a draft WPL Scheme
Order. It will be necessary to have a draft WPL Scheme Order as an appendix to the
OBC and for it to be available for the public consultation programme (WS2.2).
The work carried out across WS1.1 to WS1.4 will need to feature in the OBC in order
to demonstrate the need for a WPL scheme, how much it would cost to operate, what
the WPL will fund and which geographical area(s) the scheme would cover.
It will also be necessary to undertake the mapping of current and potential displaced
parking hotspots around employment centres to accelerate the delivery of prioritised
traffic management schemes should a scheme larger than the Central Core scheme
be chosen. Once the WPL scheme “goes live”, it is likely that some commuters will

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 13
look to find cheaper or free parking; it is therefore important that a hotspot mapping
analysis exercise is started to identify and address these potential issues before they
arise. However, if the preferred Central Core scheme is chosen then it is felt that the
existing Residents Permit Schemes should cover and tackle potential displaced
parking.
If a WPL is implemented, Bristol City Council will be liable to pay the charge and it is
recommended that early consideration is given as to how this cost will be met.
Nottingham City Council chose to implement a car park management scheme, the
WPC, which charges employees to park at their workplace in an effort to encourage
them to make more sustainable travel choices. The amount each staff member pays
for parking is dependent on their pay grade, with higher earners paying more. The
WPC scheme helps fund Nottingham City Council's parking management systems on
its employee car parks as well as being used to pay some of Nottingham City Council’s
WPL charge. It is recommended that Bristol City Council scope a car park
management scheme during WS1.4, to show that it is taking a lead in commuter
management.
As work for Stage One begins, a clear Stakeholder Management Strategy and
Communications Plan must be developed that looks to discuss and gain an
understanding of the future transport infrastructure that medium and large employers
would like to see introduced.
Recommendation R6 – Introduce a risk management strategy and regularly update
the Risk Register
Recommendation R7 – Draft a WPL Scheme Order
Recommendation R8 – Introduce and progress the displaced parking workstream to
tackle the potential displacement of commuter parking
Recommendation R9 – Consider the introduction of a car park management scheme
at Bristol City Council premises, where commuter parking occurs
(WS1.5) WPL Package
The WPL Project Team should determine the WPL Package, which will be funded from
the revenue generated. The WPL Package should be outlined in the OBC and it must
show how it will allow Bristol City Council to achieve the vision and targets outlined in
the One City Plan and upcoming JLTP5. The OBC should set out how much the WPL
Package will cost to implement and how it will be funded, i.e. through the revenue
generated by the WPL scheme and alternative sources such as grants, prudential
borrowing, etc.
It is a legal requirement of the primary legislation (Transport Act 2000) that WPL
scheme revenue is ring-fenced for the delivery of Local Transport Plan policies and
objectives. It will be necessary for Bristol City Council to identify what the WPL scheme
will be expected to contribute towards and how it is an essential part of the delivery of

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 14
Bristol City Council’s transport strategy; this will also form a key part of the
communications messaging undertaken as part of the early Stakeholder Management
Strategy and informal consultation messaging and engagement.
Early thought should also be given towards what type of business support programme
will be established to assist and support employers in preparing for the introduction of
the WPL scheme. The business support function should advise employers on how
they can take advantage of key support packages relating to travel planning, parking
management, active travel and demand management in advance of the scheme being
implemented. A quality business support offer will help mitigate any negative
perceptions of the scheme and maximise early delivery of the positive impacts of the
WPL.
The expected outputs from the delivery of the five Stage One workstreams (WS1.1 to
WS1.5 above) will form the basis for Bristol City Council to formally progress to Stage
Two of the WPL Route Map and commit the necessary resources and budgets to
advance the scheme.
Recommendation R10 – Outline the transport package that will be funded by the
revenue generated from a WPL scheme

5.1.2 (PM1.0) Stage One Project Management – Outputs

The adoption of a proven project management methodology and application of
experienced project management resources to manage the internal and external
resources in the delivery of the identified workstreams will be key; it will ensure that
risks and issues are effectively minimised or mitigated, costs and budget management
is closely scrutinised and timescales are adhered to.
It is expected that at the conclusion of Stage One of the WPL Route Map, the following
outputs will be delivered and approval can then be sought from the Bristol City Council
management team to proceed to Stage Two:
(PM1.1) Outline Business Case (OBC)
The OBC will provide justification and a comprehensive explanation of the following:

• Why the scheme is being implemented
• What scheme is being implemented
• How the scheme will be implemented
• Who is implementing the scheme
• When the scheme will be implemented by

The OBC will be the primary document that Bristol City Council will use as part of the
public consultation exercise in Stage Two.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 15
(PM1.2) Supporting Appendices
All relevant supporting studies, information and modelling will be appended to the
OBC. The appendices will demonstrate that Bristol City Council have undertaken
detailed works to provide the foundations for a WPL scheme, which are supported by
relevant expert advice and, ideally, based upon strong evidence from Nottingham’s
WPL scheme. The appendices will include supporting studies, modelling and datasets
on employers to estimate the potential number of LWPPs, through OSPAs and the
unique multiple regression analysis exercise. The appendices will also set out how the
WPL scheme forms part of, and complies with, local, regional and national policy,
guidance and objectives.
(PM1.3) Draft WPL Scheme Design
The guiding principles for Bristol City Council’s WPL scheme will be set out at the end
of Stage One, to enable employers and key stakeholders to understand how the
scheme is expected to work and what impacts the scheme would have on these
relevant groups. The scheme design will also demonstrate the options around which
elements of the scheme may be consulted upon as part of the public consultation
process (i.e. potential discounts for particular types of employer – the NHS, emergency
services, charities, etc.).
(PM1.4) Approval to Proceed to Stage Two
The appropriate Bristol City Council approval process would need to be complied with
and relevant processes and procedures must be followed to enable Bristol City Council
to make a formal decision at the end of Stage One to either stop any further scheme
development, delay scheme development, undertake further works to enhance the
OBC or approve the OBC and proceed to Stage Two.

5.1.3 (WS2.0) Stage Two: Public Consultation and Approval

Stage Two of the WPL Route Map will focus on preparing the relevant documentation,
processes, procedures and activities to undertake a formal public consultation. A
formal public consultation is recommended as good practice by the DfT, although the
length of the consultation period is a decision to be made by the local authority. The
tasks mentioned will assist in formalising the OBC into a FBC, following completion of
the public consultation. The FBC will then be submitted to the Secretary of State for
Transport for their approval to progress to Stage Three.
In conjunction with the work above, a detailed scheme design will need to be
completed and the relevant specifications and procurement activities undertaken to
prepare Bristol City Council for implementation of the WPL scheme in Stage Three.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 16
Stage Two of the WPL Route Map sets out the four key workstreams required to
undertake the public consultation exercise and gain the subsequent approvals to
proceed to Stage Three:
(WS2.1) Public Consultation Preparation
Bristol City Council will need to create and manage the necessary public consultation
documentation (leaflets, posters, letters, etc.) and communication platforms (social
media, websites, phoneline, email inboxes, etc.) to deliver a thorough public
consultation programme. All events and activities (such as employer workshops) will
need to be planned in to ensure that the consultation is comprehensive, consistent
and actively engages all relevant stakeholder groups in the process. During WS2.1, it
will be necessary to work with representatives in marketing and communications to
identify if Bristol City Council have a policy for public consultation which they must
follow.
The latest government guidance does not state specifically how long a public
consultation period should be.8 If Bristol City Council are unable to show that adequate
consultation has taken place, then this could lead to the Secretary of State for
Transport rejecting or delaying Bristol’s WPL scheme. It will therefore be important for
the WPL Project Team to work with the marketing and communications
representatives to identify a sufficient consultation period and demonstrate that robust
and adequate consultation has taken place. Bristol City Council must justify the chosen
consultation period and show that adequate engagement was held with stakeholders.
Recommendation R11 – Develop a detailed public consultation programme including
specified timeframes, activities and methodology
(WS2.2) Public Consultation
The public consultation programme will require a significant amount of additional
resources to undertake events and activities, engaging with interested parties and
stakeholders through both proactive and reactive communications. The consultation
will include the processing, categorisation and management of all responses, as well
as any additional data collection, analysis and compilation of reports that will form a
necessary part of the submission to the Secretary of State for Transport for approval.
The result of the work detailed above will culminate in the production of a suite of
public consultation documents, setting out Bristol City Council’s response to the public
consultation and informing the production of the FBC. The resulting FBC will be the
justification for Bristol City Council’s WPL scheme and, at this point, the scheme will
be based upon robust and tested evidence, which has met or exceeded the legislative
requirements addressed in the Red Tape Challenge and has undergone significant
and sustained local, regional and national scrutiny.9

8 Consultation Principles 2018 - link
9 Department For Transport (2012) - Roads: Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) - link

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 17
Recommendation R12 – Carry out a robust public consultation programme to engage
and consult with all key stakeholders

(WS2.3) WPL Approval
The FBC and supporting documentation will need to be packaged and approved by
Bristol City Council in consultation with the DfT. Once the FBC has been approved, it
will be submitted to the Secretary of State for Transport for their consideration and
approval. At this stage, the approval process, and therefore the timeline, will sit with
central government rather than Bristol City Council and any further work towards
preparing for Stage Three will be undertaken at risk until an approval decision is
provided. Early and continued engagement with the DfT and the Secretary of State
for Transport will be essential to minimise the risk of significant delays or changes to
the proposed scheme design.
Along with the FBC, the suite of supporting documents should include a finalised WPL
Scheme Order which is updated and reflects feedback from the public consultation
programme.
(WS2.4) WPL Scheme Development
In parallel to workstreams WS2.1 to WS2.3, a detailed WPL scheme development
programme will need to be undertaken to prepare the necessary information for the
public consultation campaign. Items to be addressed will include:

• How Bristol City Council’s WPL scheme will operate
• Who will be impacted
• What the charges will be
• How the scheme will be enforced
• What business support will be provided

The final options for the detailed scheme design will be agreed once the public
consultation has concluded. The scheme design and WPL Scheme Order will then
need to be finalised and submitted as part of the FBC and public consultation
documentation.
It will also be necessary for roles and responsibilities to be specified for the day-to-day
operational running of the WPL scheme. The procurement processes for the finance
and employer licensing systems must also be outlined in Stage Two, in order for Bristol
City Council to prepare the options and the preferred route for how they plan to operate
their WPL scheme if they successfully progress to Stage Three. The options for the
running of the scheme are in-house, joint venture or outsourced operating models,
which should be considered by Bristol City Council to enable the necessary due
diligence (specifications, tendering, procurement, value for money etc.) to be
undertaken and enable the preferred route for delivery in Stage Three.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 18
It is also important to develop and finalise the business support package programme
(e.g. travel planning and parking management advice and assistance, cycle
infrastructure grants, public transport investment detail and personal journey planning,
traffic management programme for displaced parking) that Bristol City Council will
provide in advance to employers to help them prepare for the WPL scheme.

5.1.4 (PM2.0) Project Management – Outputs

The adoption of a proven project management methodology and application of
experienced project management resources to manage the internal and external
resources in the delivery of the identified workstreams will be key; ensuring that risks
and issues are effectively minimised or mitigated, costs and budget management is
closely scrutinised and timescales are adhered to.
It is expected that at the conclusion of Stage Two of the WPL Route Map, the following
outputs will be delivered and approval can then be sought from the Bristol City Council
management team to proceed to Stage Three:
(PM2.1) Approved WPL Final Business Case (FBC)
The FBC will be finalised and approved for the implementation of a Bristol City Council
WPL scheme. The FBC will include all relevant supporting appendices, the final
scheme design, WPL Scheme Order and the supporting suite of public consultation
documentation. The FBC will then be approved by Bristol City Council and submitted
to the Secretary of State for Transport for their approval.
(PM2.2) Detailed Scheme Design for Stage Three
Bristol City Council’s preferred option for how it will implement and operate their WPL
scheme will be finalised and the necessary investment and preparatory works will have
been undertaken, to ensure that Bristol City Council is ready to deliver its WPL scheme
in line with the key milestone dates identified in Stage Three.
(PM2.3) Confirmed Project Plan to “Go Live”
Stage Three will include key milestone dates and activities that will require extensive
project management and allocation of resources, as Bristol City Council will have
committed to scheme implementation and the operational “go live” plan. Stage Three
carries significant reputational and income risks if there is a failure to deliver the
relevant workstreams or there are any delays to the overall programme.
(PM2.4) Approval to Proceed to Stage Three
The relevant Bristol City Council approval processes would need to be complied with
to enable Bristol City Council to make the formal decision at the end of Stage Two;
this would follow the Secretary of State for Transport’s approval to proceed to Stage
Three and commit Bristol City Council to implementing its WPL scheme.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 19
5.1.5 (WS3.0) Stage Three: Implementation and Operation

Stage Three of the WPL Route Map will focus on engagement with employers, to
ensure that they are aware of their legal obligations and the practical steps involved in
obtaining their WPL licence(s). The engagement will include demonstrating all of the
necessary front and back office licensing processes and requirements to ensure that
the scheme is successfully implemented and employers are acting in accordance with
the legislation.
Assuming Bristol City Council follow Nottingham City Council’s WPL scheme
implementation programme, employers will start to be required to license between 1st
January 2024 and 31st March 2024, as Bristol City Council begin to populate their
licensing database. There will then be a six month period of ‘no charging’ from 1st
April 2024, while work is actively undertaken to ensure employers are licensed
correctly and any non-compliance is addressed appropriately before charging
commences on 1st October 2024. These indicative dates provide Bristol City Council
with suggested key milestones for embarking on the WPL Route Map approach to
implementing a WPL scheme.
Stage Three of the WPL Route Map sets out the next four workstreams required to
implement and operate a WPL scheme:
(WS3.1) WPL Implementation
Once the implementation stage is ready to proceed, Bristol City Council will need to
create the necessary information and communication platforms to deliver a wide range
of detail to employers, to explain their legal obligations and provide guidance on how
to obtain a WPL licence.
The practical events and activities (employer workshops) in the lead up to the
implementation date should focus on providing employers with working guidance and
assistance in obtaining a WPL licence and complying with the legal requirements of
the scheme.
(WS3.2) Employer Licensing
It is recommended that a three month period prior to 1st April 2024 is used to populate
the licensing database with all employer details, ready for the issuing of the first WPL
licences. The system for obtaining a WPL licence should be straightforward for
employers with clear guidance as to what information is required. It is important to
support and encourage employers during this period to engage and apply for a licence;
focused employer workshops and targeted licensing support (small, medium, large
employers) will all assist in ensuring that employers are licensed before the scheme
“goes live”.
(WS3.3) Scheme “Go Live” (No WPL Charge for Six Months)

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 20
The Secretary of State for Transport recommended to Nottingham City Council during
their WPL scheme implementation stage that a “no charge” period should be in place
for a period of six months. The period of six months is recommended as it provides
enough time to allow the local authority to work with employers to ensure that they
have obtained a WPL licence and are licensed correctly. Moreover, this provides time
for employers to understand their legal obligations and the potential consequences
should they not comply. The six month “no charge” period was extremely beneficial in
Nottingham’s experience, as a significant amount of initial non-compliance was found
to be unintentional and was rectified relatively simply by educating employers on the
details of the WPL scheme.
It will also be necessary to start the WPL licence renewal process during this stage as
a WPL licence is issued on an annual basis. Nottingham’s WPL operates by the
financial year (1st April to 31st March), as this fits in with most business’ accounts but
there is no reason why the licensing period cannot begin on a different date.
The window for employers to renew their licence opens three months before the new
licensing year. A period of three months allows sufficient time to process licences and
encourages employers to review and renew their licences in advance of the 31st
March deadline. The renewal process is straightforward and, in Nottingham, is
completed by the employer through their online WPL account, a process which
typically takes less than 10 minutes.
(WS3.4) WPL Charging Commences
Assuming the WPL scheme is delivered in line with the timescales above, charging
will commence from 1st October 2024. Compliance and enforcement activities will be
a priority for the Bristol City Council WPL Operational Team at this stage, in relation
to any employers who remain unlicensed or are believed to be licensed incorrectly.
Business support resources will continue to provide packages aimed at helping
employers to comply and manage their WPL provision and liability. The traffic
management team will prioritise addressing displaced parking hotspots that
materialise following ‘go live’. Furthermore, the team should monitor and respond as
appropriate when employers adopt parking management schemes and employees
change their travel behaviour (predominantly expected during the first three years of
operation).

5.1.6 (PM3.0) Project Management – Outputs

It is expected that at the conclusion of Stage Three of the WPL Route Map, the
following outputs will be delivered to confirm the completion of the project and the
Bristol City Council WPL Project Team will hand over any outstanding issues (e.g.
operational improvements) to the Bristol City Council WPL Operational Team, as the
scheme moves into its ‘business as usual’ phase:
(PM3.1) All WPL Employers Licensed

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 21
All employers that provide any WPPs in the Bristol City Council scheme area will have
obtained a WPL licence during the “no charge” period and then rene
wed that licence ahead of the charging period using their online WPL account.
(PM3.2) Compliance and Enforcement Commenced
The Bristol City Council WPL Operational Team will have commenced all relevant
compliance and enforcement activities and will be focused on ensuring all employers
are licensed correctly and prioritising the deployment of business support resources.
(PM3.3) WPL Charging Commenced and Income Generation
The charging will have commenced and all front and back office processes and
procedures will be tested and operating. Income generation will be ring-fenced for the
WPL operation and accompanying business support, along with the investment and
delivery of relevant LTP policies and objectives (WPL Package) that are outlined in
the approved Bristol City Council WPL Scheme Order.
(PM3.4) Business Support Actively in Place
The business support team will be actively supporting the Bristol City Council WPL
Operational Team to enable a smooth introduction of the scheme and assisting
employers to manage their WPL liability and workplace parking. WPL business
support is expected to cover travel planning, car park management, journey planning,
public transport investment detail, supporting grants and cycling support.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 22
5.2 Milestones and External Dependencies

To establish a WPL Route Map, it is important to consider the project milestones and
dependencies that must be monitored and managed to ensure successful delivery of
the Bristol City Council WPL scheme.
The milestones and dependencies are centred around key national, regional and local
events that may have positive or negative impacts on the delivery of the project. The
Milestones and Dependencies Timeline (Appendix D) shows the key milestones and
events that will be important to monitor and manage in Bristol. To identify the
milestones and dependencies, Nottingham City Council met with key officers from
Bristol City Council to identify relevant events covering the period from April 2021 to
the anticipated Bristol City Council WPL scheme “go live” date of October 2024, when
charging commences.
Although it has not been referenced in the Milestones and Dependencies Timeline,
the full effects of Brexit are yet to be felt and it will be important to monitor the reaction
of businesses as the UK’s relationship with the wider world adjusts to this change. The
customs transitional arrangement will end at the beginning of January 2022, meaning
that importers must begin submitting their new customs declaration on all relevant
goods.10 It is too early to ascertain the impact of this on Bristol businesses but it is
clearly one example of why the continuing “new normal” post-Brexit needs to be
monitored.
55% of Bristol’s exports are sold to the European Union (EU) and nearly half of
exporters in Bristol feel that their trade with the EU will decrease post-Brexit, which
could impact on productivity and employment within Bristol.11 In addition to this, a
report conducted post-Brexit by the Centre for Cities estimated that cities such as
Bristol may see a drop in the Gross Value Added of the city due to their large share of
employment within private-sector knowledge-intensive services.12 It will be necessary
to monitor and engage with businesses as the EU trade agreement comes into full
effect to establish the positive and negative impacts, both short and long term, in order
to adapt to the new post-Brexit market and adapt the WPL scheme as required to cater
for these changes. Conversely, trade deals with countries such as the one recently
established with Australia open up new markets and opportunities for Bristol
businesses and could well see the “make-up” of businesses within Bristol change; this

10 UK forces to delay checks on imports from EU by six months - link
11 Why Bristol’s economic prosperity is ‘at risk’ – link
12 Clayton, N & Overman, H.G. (2017). Brexit, trade and the economic impacts on UK cities, Centre for Cities -

link

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 23
could influence decisions when developing the WPL scheme such as the small
employer discount threshold or level of charge.
Since March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has seen countries around the world go
into “lockdown” and commuting reduce dramatically as people were instructed to work
from home. Across the UK, cities saw improvements in air quality and congestion due
to the implementation of these lockdown restrictionsbut unsurprisingly, the levels of
pollution increased again whenever restrictions were eased. Analysis conducted by
the Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs showed a 44% drop in NO2
levels from the previous year but pollutants such as PM2.5 and PM10 saw a steady
rise throughout the year. 13 The outbreak of COVID-19 led to an increase in the use of
private motor vehicles for both commuting and personal journeys, due to reduced
confidence in safety on public transport. As the threat of COVID-19 reduces and
confidence in using public transport returns, it is expected that levels of PM2.5 and
PM10 will reduce to pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels; however it will be important to
monitor the “new normal” in terms of travel behaviour and working arrangements. The
employment “make-up” of Bristol suggests that at least 50% of workers have the ability
to work from home in some capacity.14 It is important to continue to monitor these
datasets and manage the impact of new ways of working upon Bristol’s air quality and
congestion as we come out of COVID-19 restrictions, to ensure that the WPL scheme
and WPL package meet the needs of the post-pandemic city.
The local elections in May 2021 saw the Green Party gain seats in Bristol. The Green
Party endorse a WPL scheme as part of the solution to the congestion and air quality
problems in Bristol; therefore the extra seats held by the Green Party on Bristol City
Council increases the support for a scheme.15 It will be important for the Bristol City
Council Mayor and WPL Project Team to engage with the Green Party as part of the
development of the WPL scheme, as their support would be beneficial to the
successful delivery of the WPL project.
In order to tackle air quality issues in Bristol, the Bristol CAZ will be implemented in
summer 2022 and it is envisaged that the CAZ, along with other measures, will
improve air quality in Bristol and make the city compliant with central government
targets by 2023. However, the WPL Package will outline how the WPL scheme will
further improve air quality in Bristol in order to contribute towards the goal for becoming
a carbon neutral city by 2030 and ensure air quality levels are sustainable as the city
grows and prospers. It will therefore be important to regularly monitor air quality levels
to ensure that the air quality targets set out in the FBC are achievable and build on the
progress made by the CAZ.
The Bus Service Improvement Plan will be submitted in October 2021. Improving the
bus network across Bristol is seen as one of the main deliverables of the WPL

13 Bristol's traffic patterns have changed during the Coronavirus pandemic - link; Quino, V., & Enenkel, K. (2020)

- How have the Covid pandemic and lockdown affected air quality in cities? link
14 NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics, Bristol - link
15 Green Proposal to raise millions of pounds to shake up transport in Bristol - link

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 24
Package, therefore monitoring the funds received and improvements realised as part
of the plan is critical. The WPL Package aims to build on the Bus Back Better
improvements in order to deliver the objectives within the One City Plan of making the
bus services in Bristol cleaner, cheaper and more accessible to its citizens.
Similarly, it is important to ensure that the active travel element of the WPL Package
is complementary to the Liveable Neighbourhoods policy outlined in the JLTP4.
The JLTP5 will set out a vision for transport in Bristol and it is important to ensure that
the WPL Package fits into the wider transport vision for the WECA, to minimise cross-
boundary conflicts in transport policy.
The CRSTS, which is a follow up to the TCF2, will go live for the submission of bids in
2023. The WPL Project Team will need to monitor and support any bids submitted by
the WECA, ensuring that they are complementary to the WPL Package and
demonstrate how they will help deliver the wider transport goals outlined by the WECA
in the JLTP5.
There are a number of major projects planned from 2024 and beyond that will also
require monitoring, these include city centre redevelopments and the implementation
of “strategic corridors”, which are areas where it is expected that Bristol City Council
will see economic growth following investment in transport infrastructure. It will be
critical to monitor and engage with these projects to ensure that the proposed WPL
Package integrates and supports the wider JLTP5 and One City Plan.
The One City Plan aims to create a fairer, greener society which residents are proud
to live and work in; key parts of the plan are to boost productivity, culture and transport.
The WPL Package should be viewed as contributing to the delivery of the wider One
City Plan goals, in particular the desired improvements in sustainable transport and
the 2030 carbon neutral city commitment.
The Timeline for a Bristol WPL Scheme contains key dates and periods for the critical
workstreams across a three-stage approach. The timeline has been calculated under
the assumption that Bristol City Council would begin to develop a WPL scheme in
October 2021 and aim to “go live” in October 2024.
It is essential to regularly review and update the Milestones and Dependencies
Timeline so that any impact on the delivery of the WPL Route Map can be identified
and included within the project Risk Register, with appropriate risk mitigation put into
place. A comprehensive review will be necessary over the next six to nine months to
inform Bristol City Council’s WPL plans, as the impact of ongoing dependencies such
as COVID-19, Brexit, Bristol’s CAZ and the Bus Back Better strategy become clearer.
Recommendation R13 – Monitor the new working arrangements and commuter
travel behaviour as a return to a “new normal” begins, following the lifting of lockdown
restrictions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 25
Recommendation R14 – Regularly review and update the Milestones and
Dependencies Timeline
5.3 Data Analysis and Quality Assurance of the Atkins Study

Nottingham City Council have carried out an in-depth review of the Atkins Study
produced in February 2011.
The analysis of the study sought to assess the validity of the methodology used by
Atkins to estimate the potential number of WPPs in the Bristol City Council
administrative area. The review also contains a high-level assessment of the small
employer discount threshold and provides an estimate on potential income based on
the study results.
The review is split into four sections:
1. Description of Methodology
2. Analysis/Critique of Methodology
3. Estimate on Potential Income
4. Recommendations
This analysis will provide a robust basis to undertake further work to calculate the
number of potential WPPs in Bristol for a Central Core, Expanded Central Core and
Citywide scheme area.

5.3.1 Description of Methodology

The Nottingham City Council project team carried out a review of the Atkins Study and
the following section provides a brief description of the methodology used by Atkins,
as understood by Nottingham City Council. The audit carried out by Atkins in 2011
focussed on collating data through site visits (car counts) and analysis of aerial
photography. Where car parks were not accessible or hidden, the surveyors based
their estimates for these sites on the proportion of the building plot (estimated by
surveyors) and an assumed relationship of one parking space per 25 square metres.
The survey results were then cross-referenced and validated with Valuation Office
Agency (VOA) data. The surveyors also used the VOA online search function to
validate the WPP estimates within hidden buildings or undercrofts.
A further check of the surveyors’ estimates was then conducted by Atkins, comparing
the WPP estimates for the city centre with the number of inbound private vehicle trips
made into the city centre. The surveyors considered the number of public car parking
spaces when checking the difference in the number of journeys made into the city
centre and the number of estimated WPPs. The difference between the total parking
stock in the city centre and inbound journeys made into the city centre lead to a surplus
of 5,936 spaces that were unaccounted for. Atkins concluded that “some” of these
journeys were for leisure or non-commuting business purposes but there were still
regularly unused parking spaces.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 26
Therefore when reading the Atkins Study, the final number of WPPs declared
consisted of a mix of cars parked in parking spaces, minus an estimate of how many
of these were fleet vehicles, plus estimates for buildings where car parks were not
visible.
The Nottingham City Council project team reviewed the Atkins Study results and
methodology against the successful methodology used when implementing the
Nottingham City Council WPL scheme and, more recently, when working with the
Leicester City Council WPL project team to estimate how many WPPs there may be
in the Leicester City Council administrative area.

5.3.2 Analysis/Critique

Nottingham City Council acknowledge that the Atkins methodology required significant
assumptions to be considered in order for a robust estimate to be derived for the
potential number of WPPs in a Bristol Central Core, Expanded Central Core and
Citywide scheme.
The survey that was conducted as part of the Atkins Study did not include any
engagement with employers. A limitation from this lack of engagement was being able
to accurately estimate the amount of parking spaces within a premise that are
attributed for fleet/operational purposes or customer usage. The survey was able to
estimate the amount of spaces designated for customer use at retail businesses,
however, in order to gather an accurate estimate of WPPs, it is essential to engage
with employers since they hold the necessary information. Furthermore, all
fleet/operational vehicles may not be easily identifiable within a car park. The
estimates do not consider behavioural patterns or any variance in the provisions of
WPPs at each premise, which a recommended OSPA will do.
A “feet on the ground” OSPA that factors in the concerns from the previous Atkins
Study will provide Bristol City Council with a detailed estimate of the potential number
of WPPs in the Bristol City Council administrative area along with data on the number
of employers, contact names, size of businesses, industries, etc. The data gathered
will assist the WPL Project Team with justification for the threshold when setting the
small employer discount.
Recommendation R15 – Conduct a “feet on the ground” OSPA that factors in any
questions from the previous Atkins Study
Additionally, the surveys were heavily based on business’ on-site car parks in the
Central Core. Although the majority of WPPs offered by employers will be on the same
site as the business premise, it is likely that some employers will hold contract parking
agreements with multi-storey and surface car park operators or have sites which are
jointly managed with other employers within the city centre area; this makes analysing
images and doing simple car counts ineffective for WPP estimations. The lack of clarity
on car parking spaces is shown by the large differences in the upper and lower
estimates for each scheme size, as shown in Table One below.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 27
Recommendation R16 – Identify and include any existing displaced commuter
parking counts in the WPP estimations (for example, on-street parking around
industrial estates)
Table One: Lower and Upper Estimates of WPPs in Bristol7

Scheme Size Lower Estimate Upper Estimate
Central Core 8,600 9,500
Expanded Central Core 10,000 15,000
Citywide 36,000 57,000

The Atkins Study methodology noted that it was unable to distinguish the number of
WPPs attributed to each employer within car parks for sites where there is multiple
employer occupancy.
A further key point to note is the lack of clarity as to whether the hospitals and
universities have been included in the count. In Nottingham, the NHS premises receive
a 100% discount from the WPL charge but are the largest provider of workplace
parking, therefore understanding whether the Atkins Study surveys included NHS sites
is essential.
The Atkins Study does not include any estimates for a reduction in employee parking.
Nottingham saw a reduction in workplace parking of around 16% when the WPL
scheme was introduced and the WPL charge was far lower than Bristol’s proposed
rate. It is important to understand the price elasticity of parking within Bristol to
determine what would be a suitable estimate for a reduction in parking demand, and
subsequently income.
Where spaces were not visible, the surveyors assumed that one parking space
occupied 25 square metres. The justification behind this assumed relationship is
unclear. Nottingham City Council’s experience would suggest that the assumption is
inaccurate since the car parks may not be marked and lined. It is highly likely that this
assumption will have led to some under and over-estimates in the prediction of WPPs.
The Atkins Study does not include a detailed breakdown of the sites that were
surveyed and audited. A review of the list of sites that were visited and cross-
referenced with VOA data would be recommended as a starting point in order to begin
categorising employers by size and industry.
In order to estimate how many WPPs Bristol may have, Nottingham City Council can
make use of their own real time data and predict the number of WPPs in the Bristol
City Council scheme area. The desktop model will use real experience to consider the
expected behaviour of businesses and commuters once a WPL scheme is
implemented. The desktop modelling technique can also be used to undertake
scenario testing such as the inclusion of NHS premises.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 28
Recommendation R17 – Review the list of sites visited by Atkins and cross-reference
with VOA data, in order to begin categorising employers by size and industry

5.3.3 Estimate on Potential Income

The Atkins Study calculated net revenue based on the estimated WPPs from the
surveys that were conducted. The net revenue was calculated on the basis of a charge
of £300 per WPP, which was in line with Nottingham’s charge of £288 in 2012. Inflation
was factored in and based on a Central Core scheme with a £300 per WPP charge,
the net revenue was estimated at £2 million - significantly short of the targeted £7
million per annum income target. Atkins also considered a £500 per WPP charge for
a Central Core scheme which would unlock the desired £100 million investment
package (~£7 million per annum), however there was significant concern regarding
the potential impact on local businesses and the burden the charge would place on
them.7
Early discussions held between the Nottingham City Council project team and Bristol
City Council officers indicated that a Central Core scheme is favoured.
Multi-storey car parks owned by Bristol City Council currently offer annual season
tickets ranging in price from £1,872-£2,496.16 The daily parking charge varies between
£10-£12 for Bristol City Council owned car parks and well-known private car parking
companies such as NCP.
In comparison to the market rate for parking within Bristol further analysis, potentially
in the shape of a survey, needs to be conducted to analyse the cost of all options
across the city that would be viable for motorists, to identify if the WPL cost is
reasonable, proportionate and will ensure the delivery of the WPL scheme objectives.
A survey should look to ask questions about commuters’ choices and future choices
dependent on set scenarios (i.e. implementation of a WPL scheme). The data
gathered from this survey would assist in determining a sustainable charge. Including
a survey question to ascertain the size and type of the business will help inform the
setting of a small employer discount threshold.
The cost of an annual First Bus Bristol Zone travel pass is £715.17 It will therefore be
important to take this into account when developing robust justification for the WPP
charge under an Expanded Central Core scheme. The WPL Project Team must justify
the charge by setting out Bristol City Council’s transport vision and the part a WPL
would play, e.g. influencing a modal shift in travel behaviour, reducing congestion,
improving air quality and funding more sustainable transport options as part of the
JLTP5.
Recommendation R18 – Conduct further research into the cost of parking provided
by private companies.

16 Car park annual season tickets and pre-paid tickets, Bristol.gov.uk – link
17 Bristol, Bath and the West Bus Ticket Prices – link

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 29
Recommendation R19 – Conduct a survey in Stage One to further understand
commuter behaviour across the Bristol region

5.3.4 Discount Level
At the request of Bristol City Council, the Nottingham City Council project team have
also looked into the potential small employer discount threshold which Bristol City
Council could introduce as part of their WPL scheme. The Atkins Study modelled the
implementation of a small employer discount threshold for employers with ten or less
WPPs, based on Nottingham’s WPL scheme. Although the datasets and employers
were cross-referenced with the VOA database, it is unknown exactly what detail Atkins
obtained as the Nottingham City Council project team have not seen the actual
database which Atkins compiled from the survey. To accurately understand the
appropriate discount level that Bristol City Council should consider, it will be important
to review the original datasets collected by Atkins in order to identify gaps that need
to be covered ahead of a more up to date analysis and estimation of WPPs.
A review of the size of businesses in Bristol based on data from the Office for National
Statistics shows that not only is there a larger number of smaller businesses in Bristol,
they also account for a slightly larger proportion of businesses in comparison with
Nottingham. In Nottingham, 78% of businesses have less than 10 employees whereas
in Bristol, the figure is 81.5%.14 A difference of 3.5% may not seem particularly large,
however the number of businesses in Bristol is nearly twice that of Nottingham (22,780
vs 11,970). Numbers of employees does influence the number of WPPs a business
licenses for. It is worthy of note that despite Bristol having nearly 11,000 more
businesses than Nottingham, there are 255 more businesses in Bristol with over 50
employers, than in Nottingham.18 Table Two shows the comparison between business
sizes in Bristol and Nottingham.
Table Two: Comparison of Business Size – Bristol v Nottingham19

Business Bristol Bristol Nottingham Nottingham
Size (Number) (% of total) (Number) (% of total)
Micro (0-9) 18,560 81.5% 9,340 78.0%
Small (10-
3,350 14.7% 2,015 16.8%
49)
Medium
750 3.3% 535 4.5%
(50-249)
Large
120 0.5% 80 0.7%
(250+)

18 NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics, Nottingham - link
19 NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics, Bristol - link; NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics, Nottingham -

link

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 30
The proposed Bristol WPL scheme is a Central Core scheme and this area is
understood to be heavily office based with predominantly professional/administrative
industries located around the city centre. The NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics
for Bristol suggests that around 40% of industries (J, K, L, M, N and P in the referenced
dataset) in Bristol could be categorised as office based and it would be reasonable to
assume the majority of these are located within the Central Core.19 If this assumption
is true then it would be reasonable to suggest to Bristol City Council that a lower small
employer discount threshold should be considered for their WPL scheme.
The results gathered in the Atkins Study show significant variance between the upper
and lower estimates both with (Table Three) and without (Table One) the small
employer discount threshold. The large range of variation in the estimates reinforces
the need for new, targeted parking studies to be conducted in order for more accurate
data to be gathered and to be used to form the basis of financial modelling for a WPL
scheme.
Table Three: Lower and Upper Estimates of WPPs After a 10 Place Small Employer
Discount Threshold in Bristol7

Scheme Size Lower Estimate Upper Estimate
Central Core 7,600 8,700
Expanded Central Core 12,100 17,400
Citywide 27,200 49,700

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 31
5.4 Governance and Project Team Structure

5.4.1 Introduction

The Governance and Project Team Structure is outlined in Appendix F. The chart
demonstrates the range of roles and resources that are required to deliver Stage One
of the WPL Route Map. The majority of these roles will not need to be permanent posts
but it is essential that experienced lead officers are identified and allowed sufficient
time to be fully briefed on the proposed Bristol City Council WPL scheme details.
Furthermore, the officers’ roles and their responsibilities regarding the delivery of
Stage One must be discussed and confirmed as appropriate for a project of this scale
and complexity.
Bristol City Council will need to decide whether to resource internally or externally for
the WPL Project Team roles. The initial discussions that Nottingham City Council held
with the Bristol City Council management team has led to the production of the
Governance and Project Team Structure. However, it may be necessary to amend this
structure as the project progresses if resource availability, experience and/or
requirements change.

5.4.2 Governance

Best practice with any large-scale and complex project is to have the right governance
structures in place to manage and support the work being undertaken. An effective
governance structure will enable efficient management and decision making to support
the delivery of the WPL Route Map.
A clear governance structure ensures that key leadership roles are in place to control
Bristol City Council’s commitment and resources to successfully deliver a WPL
scheme. Clearly setting out the levels of decision making and accountability will allow
effective management to be in place at all levels of the project. The formation of a
good project structure provides guidance, direction and performance management as
part of the supporting project processes.

Project governance also formalises the “what if” scenarios pertaining to issue
management (e.g. budget restrictions, unforeseen project events, scope creep, etc.)
and decision management. It will resolve the uncertainties of “who can decide what”
in a project environment and is intended to clarify the roles and responsibilities of all
project members.
Every project needs clear leadership and the concept of a single point of accountability
is a key part of effective project governance. The right people must be made
accountable and endorsed/empowered by senior management to hold sufficient
authority within the organisation, so they can effectively deliver.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 32
5.4.3 Governance Team Structure

The governance structure has been populated after workshop discussions with
relevant teams at Bristol City Council and Nottingham City Council, utilising lessons
learnt and experience from Nottingham’s scheme delivery. The structure has then
been tailored for Bristol City Council based on their own governance policy. The
structure sets out the “chain of command” that will allow for swift decision making by
officers across Bristol City Council.
Bristol Transport Board
The Bristol Transport Board has been created to oversee the delivery and
implementation of Bristol’s Transport Strategy and is one of six bodies working
towards the delivery of the One City Plan.
The Bristol Transport Board consists of senior stakeholders across Bristol, the WECA
and relevant transport groups. The Board meet on a quarterly basis but should also
meet at key stages and decision points throughout the WPL project.
The Bristol Transport Board would be provided with regular updates on the delivery of
the WPL project, the scheme design, high level risks and mitigation options. The Board
would also be asked to review and approve key policy decisions and provide guidance
on issue resolution. The Board would provide direction to ensure that the WPL Project
Team is resourced, supported and held accountable for delivery.
WPL Steering Group
The WPL Steering Group would be chaired by the relevant Director with overall
accountability for the WPL project delivery. The Director would be supported by the
Lead Manager and WPL Project Manager. Identifying other members of the Steering
Group is flexible as people will be required at different stages and key points. Steering
Group members should be of an appropriate level so that the respective services are
effectively represented.
The Steering Group would follow a set agenda, meet six weekly and be focused on
project management delivery and issue resolution; they would also review progress
on all relevant WPL workstreams contained within the WPL Route Map and undertake
the necessary due diligence to take key decisions and preferred options to the Bristol
Transport Board for their review and approval.

5.4.4 WPL Project Team

The following recommended WPL Project Team is based on Nottingham City Council’s
own WPL project and lessons learnt. Across the stages various individuals with
specialist backgrounds will be required. For consistency,it is important that the project
is directed by an experienced project manager who is supported by
officers/coordinators who are committed and focussed solely on the delivery of the

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 33
WPL project. It is essential that the WPL project is a major focus of those on the WPL
Project Team due to the size and nature of the scheme.

5.4.5 Internal (Bristol City Council) WPL Project Team Structure

Lead Manager
The Lead Manager will have direct responsibility for the delivery of the WPL Route
Map and managing the project management resources. They will report directly to the
Director responsible for the WPL Steering Group and their role will be to remove any
unnecessary delays to decision making outside of the governance meetings.
Project Manager
An experienced Project Manager should be assigned to this key role as they will be
responsible for the management and delivery of the day-to-day project and the
resources allocated to them. All relevant supporting project management processes,
procedures and documentation will be managed by this role.
Project Support Officer
Project support will need to be flexible and allocated as required to ensure that there
is the right level of support, capacity and experience available to the Project Manager
throughout delivery of the project.
WPL Package Lead Officer
The WPL OBC is the key output to be produced in Stage One of the WPL Route Map
and it will focus heavily on the proposed benefits of the delivery of a range of JLTP
and One City Plan policies and objectives, predominantly delivering a step change in
public transport infrastructure and services and the resulting outcomes and benefits
that these will achieve (the WPL Package). It is recommended that, for clarity, a single
point of contact is identified and leads on coordinating the development of the separate
elements that will make up the WPL Package. The WPL Package Lead Officer will
need to liaise with all relevant associated services, such as public transport and
transport strategy.
Economic Development Lead
Understanding and evidencing the risks and opportunities for the impact of a WPL
scheme for Bristol City Council in terms of its economy is key. A leading officer from
the economic development team contributing to the current and future visions for the
city in terms of jobs, growth, inward investment and business needs, is a major
component of the OBC. The officer will bring valuable insight into business viewpoints
and pressures that will form a key input into the Stakeholder Management Strategy
and Communications Plan and can facilitate early and sustained engagement with the
business community.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 34
JLTP Lead
The WPL revenue is ring-fenced for the delivery of JLTP and One City Plan policies
and objectives, so having a lead officer who can ensure that the WPL is clearly linked
to these policies is vital. The JLTP Lead’s ability to look for opportunities to link into
wider policies and objectives for the city, other than just transport, will also strengthen
the OBC and ensure that it remains up to date and integrated with emerging
government policy.
Legal Services Lead
Although external legal support will be required, it is recommended that Bristol City
Council allocate an internal legal resource who can ensure compliance with both
internal and external legal processes and mitigate risk. The ability to have internal and
external legal support enables a more robust check and challenge of key elements of
the design of the WPL scheme, especially in the early stages, to ensure that the basis
of the scheme is legally sound and risk mitigation is robust and evidenced based.
Procurement Lead
An officer from the procurement team will lead and advise on the appropriate
procurement options for smooth delivery of the specification, tendering and
procurement of external resources, while minimising unnecessary delays and
ensuring compliance with relevant internal procedures and procurement legislation,
e.g. Official Journal of the European Union requirements.
Finance Lead
An internal finance lead will be required to ensure that the necessary funding and
expenditure processes and procedures are in place to establish the WPL Project Team
and guarantee that financial regulations are complied with as part of project delivery.
The Finance Lead will also input into the financial modelling workstreams, by providing
source data and internal quality assurance that the financial business case
assumptions are robust and that expenditure and income assumptions are managed
at the appropriate level of risk.
Information Governance and Risk
With a project of this nature, Nottingham City Council would expect assignment of an
officer from the Information Governance and Risk team, as it is important that the
project is GDPR compliant at all stages.
Communications Officer(s)
The Communications Officer is a key role in order to establish a clear strategy for
managing stakeholders and delivering the appropriate communications messages and
campaigns during WPL Route Map delivery. Communications Officers will also initiate
early informal engagement, capturing any responses to inform the future Stakeholder
Management Strategy and Communications Plan. They will also be required to set out

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 35
key messages and briefings for internal and external officers, along with proactively
and reactively managing the media interest and engagement throughout the various
stages of project delivery.

5.4.6 External (non-Bristol City Council) Project Team Structure

The following roles are expected to be provided by external consultants, as these are
highly specialised roles and will need to be called upon as and when required.
Project Management
Assigning the right level of experienced project management resource and the
necessary project support in a timely manner will play a major part in ensuring Bristol
City Council’s readiness to commence the delivery of Stage One of the WPL Route
Map. It will be necessary to undertake a clear programme of knowledge transfer to this
team, to enable them to coordinate and initiate the production of all relevant
documentation, processes and procedures that will be required to manage a project
of this scale and complexity and make best use of resources to deliver on time, cost
and quality.
Nottingham City Council WPL Support
Nottingham City Council have invaluable knowledge and experience regarding how to
design, deliver and operate a WPL scheme since they are the first (and only) UK
authority to be operating a scheme of this type. Nottingham City Council will be able
to apply its expert knowledge and experience to tailor a support package across a
range of aspects of WPL delivery to suit the requirements of Bristol City Council.
The support offered would prove invaluable in reducing cost, time and risk associated
with the development of Bristol City Council’s own WPL scheme by following a proven
methodology and incorporating lessons learnt. The high value associated with Bristol’s
WPL scheme means that delivering the scheme a year early would be worth £7 million
to Bristol City Council, or £800,000 per month. Further, the political and reputational
benefits of delivering an effective scheme in a timely manner are innumerable.
Parliamentary Agents
It will be necessary to assign appropriately experienced and resourced Parliamentary
Agents to ensure that the tailored WPL scheme for Bristol City Council is fully
compliant with current and emerging government legislation and any risks or issues
are evidenced and mitigated, to ensure a ratified and legally robust proposal is
delivered. These agents will also work in partnership with the Bristol City Council Legal
Services Lead identified above.
Economic Consultants
Economic modelling and studies will be required to build upon existing work in order
to identify and support the proposed impacts of congestion on Bristol’s economy, along

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 36
with what benefits the WPL scheme and WPL Package will have. These studies and
subsequent findings will be a key component of evidence to support the WPL OBC
and the justification for why a WPL scheme is the right choice for Bristol City Council
to deliver their future strategic vision for Bristol.
Transport Consultants
Transport Consultants will be required to model and evidence the future predicted
peak congestion levels and types (commuter, through traffic, residential, retail, leisure,
etc.) for Bristol and the surrounding conurbation, in addition to assessing the impacts
this will have on the city, its citizens and the local economy. It will then be necessary
to model the range of options along with the positive impacts that will be expected to
be delivered as part of the WPL Package. The transport modelling work will need to
be completed in partnership with the relevant economic modelling to show a robust
case for how the WPL provides a vital contribution towards delivering the future vision
for the city. It will also be important to include relevant social impact studies as part of
these works.
Business Improvement Districts and Business Forum
These are groups of key stakeholders identified by Bristol City Council, who will be
kept up to date with regular communications on how the WPL scheme is progressing
and will be an essential source of early feedback from the business community
regarding Bristol City Council’s proposed WPL plans.
The proposed Governance and Project Team Structure will ensure that Bristol’s WPL
scheme is delivered on time, at low cost and with risks mitigated and removed where
possible. As the project moves into Stage Three, a well-rounded project team and
clear governance strategy will mean that businesses are prepared and willing to
licence and ensure that Bristol’s WPL scheme is implemented effectively.
Recommendation R20 – Follow the Governance and Project Team Structure outlined
in Appendix F and Section 5.4

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 37
5.5 Stakeholder Management Strategy and
Communications Plan

A Stakeholder Management Strategy and accompanying Communications Plan will
be key requirements in order to deliver a Bristol City Council WPL scheme as
effectively as possible. The main objectives will be:

• To ensure that appropriate stakeholders are identified and regularly updated
throughout the development of the project
• To engage with stakeholders to promote support for the WPL scheme
• To proactively manage the relationship of the project with stakeholders
throughout the project lifecycle, including the development and implementation
stages
• To ensure that all enquiries and concerns raised by the stakeholders are
recorded, reviewed and responded to as appropriate, in a timely and effective
manner

5.5.1 Stakeholder Management Strategy

Principles

Stakeholder management is the systematic identification, analysis and planning of
actions to communicate with, negotiate with and influence stakeholders. Stakeholders
are all those who have an interest or role in the project or are impacted by the project.
Effective stakeholder management is critical to a WPL scheme throughout all stages,
as stakeholders will have influence over the criteria by which the scheme’s success
will be judged.

One of the leading causes of project failure is insufficient involvement of key
stakeholders; this section seeks to identify, examine and understand the different
stakeholders for this project and explore their importance, in order to outline a process
for effective stakeholder management and communication.
The Stakeholder Radar (Appendix G) and the 2x2 Power/Influence by Interest in WPL
Matrix (Appendix H) are diagrams that provide an illustration of:

• Who the stakeholders are
• What segment they belong to
• The influence they possess
• The interest the stakeholders are likely to have in the implementation of
the WPL scheme
• The frequency and type of communication that will be required to ensure
that these stakeholders are fully engaged with the project

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 38
Communication will play a vital role in the success of this project and processes must
be in place to ensure the timely and appropriate generation, collection and
dissemination of key information throughout all stages of project delivery.
Stakeholder Appendices
The Stakeholder Radar provides an understanding of the different methods and
frequency of communication that each stakeholder layer and domain will require.
The Stakeholder Radar forms the basis for the different messages that need to be
communicated to each stakeholder, depending on the layer and segment they are
located in. Tailoring messages specific to each stakeholder group will ensure that the
interest levels held by stakeholders remain high. For example, stakeholders within the
Governance domain will require more detailed engagement and communication
regarding the overall WPL project, whereas communication with stakeholders within
the Customer domain should look to emphasise how the WPL Package will benefit
them. The Stakeholder Radar can assist the formation of a Stakeholder Management
Strategy and Communications Plan by the designated Communications Officer.
The 2x2 Power/Influence by Interest in WPL Project Matrix allows each stakeholder to
be seen in terms of their power/influence over the proposed WPL scheme and their
interest in the WPL project.
Identification of Stakeholders
Stakeholder management begins with the identification of all stakeholders who should
be involved in, or who will be affected by, the project once Stage One of the WPL
Route Map is initiated.
The process began with officers from the Nottingham City Council project team plotting
generic stakeholders onto the Stakeholder Radar. The Stakeholder Radar was then
reviewed further and updated at a workshop with Bristol City Council’s Head of City
Transport and Principal Transport Planner, to identify stakeholder groups that are
unique to the Bristol scheme. The updated Stakeholder Radar has also been reviewed
by Bristol City Council’s communications experts. The Stakeholder Radar agreed with
the Engagement and Active Travel Team Manager from Bristol City Council is now
attached at Appendix G.
The Stakeholder Radar has been segmented into four domains:

• Governance
• Customers
• Stakeholders
• Influencers
Four layers to the Stakeholder Radar then assist with prioritising each domain:
1. V = Vital to engage

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 39
2. N = Necessary to engage with
3. G = Good to have engaged
4. C = Courtesy to inform

The closer the stakeholders are to the centre of the Stakeholder Radar, the more
important communication with them is.
The WPL Route Map assists with understanding when it will be important to
communicate with stakeholders within each layer of the Stakeholder Radar. During
Stage One, it is recommended to prioritise engaging with stakeholders in layers V and
N. The stakeholders within these groups will be pivotal to the project and will be key
decision makers. As the project develops and progresses to Stage Two and Stage
Three, engagement and communication with stakeholders in layers G and C will take
place. The Stakeholder Radar is a dynamic document and should be updated as the
project progresses and new stakeholders emerge.
So that stakeholders can be efficiently managed, the stakeholder domains are defined
as follows:

1. Governance – Includes the key leaders and decision makers within Bristol
City Council who have the power to shape the WPL project. From political
figures who will be key figureheads for the endorsement of a WPL scheme
in Bristol through to Bristol City Council officers who will be responsible for
overseeing the development, implementation and eventual operation of a
Bristol WPL scheme

2. Customer – Includes the groups that will be subject to compliance with the
WPL scheme once it has been implemented. It will be vital to engage with
the businesses who are expected to provide the highest number of LWPPs
(including the NHS, although a decision will need to be made as to whether
or not NHS premises will be liable for the WPL charge) and stakeholders
representing smaller businesses who will hold fewer LWPPs per business
but will form an essential part of Bristol’s WPL scheme. The scheme area in
Bristol is currently undetermined - confirming the potential charging area will
be a key workstream in Stage One and will then allow a more definitive list
of Customer stakeholders to be produced. It will be important to engage with
the Customer stakeholder group and highlight the benefits of a WPL scheme
in terms of air quality improvement and constraints to congestion growth. It
will also be important to communicate the WPL Package that will be funded
by the WPL revenue and how it will benefit the city and these Customers

3. Stakeholders – Includes the groups and individuals that will actually
provide the resources, infrastructure and decision making for the
implementation of the WPL Package. It will be vital to engage with the One
City Transport Board which was created in 2019 to manage the

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 40
implementation and delivery of Bristol’s transport strategy. The WPL
revenue is expected to be used to upgrade the bus network in Bristol with
sustainable buses, new park and ride routes and safer active travel
infrastructure to encourage more journeys via cycling and walking. It will
therefore be important to engage with the Public Transport Operators and
those involved in delivering the infrastructure. Legally, it is necessary to
obtain approval for the JLTP from the DfT. It is therefore important that there
is engagement with the JLTP team to ensure the WPL Package assists in
delivering the JLTP objectives

4. Influencers – Includes the stakeholders who will be influential but will not
be key decision makers for a WPL scheme in Bristol. Influencers all have
the power to influence larger groups, as illustrated in the Stakeholder Radar.
Additionally, with the aim of constraining congestion growth and improving
air quality, it is likely that environmental organisations and groups will
support the WPL scheme, therefore communication with these bodies will
be important once Stage One begins. It is important that effective
communication highlights the benefits of a WPL scheme to these
stakeholders in order to reduce scepticism and opposition to the project,
therefore reducing the risk. As the project progresses from Stage One
towards Stage Two and Stage Three, engagement with the stakeholders
listed in groups G and C on the Stakeholder Radar will be required.

Responsibility for Stakeholder Management
The governance of stakeholder engagement will be the responsibility of the WPL
Steering Group (see Appendix F). The WPL Steering Group should allocate
management responsibility based on those who are best placed and skilled to manage
a particular stakeholder engagement process, reflecting the nature and importance of
the stakeholder interest. Those with a strategic interest tend to be best served
corporately by the council and the WPL Steering Group, while those with a specific
project interest are generally best served by the relevant resource(s) within the Bristol
City Council WPL Project Team. Section 5.4 outlines the detail around the Governance
and Project Team Structure.
Stakeholder management and the allocation of responsibility will be an ongoing
process throughout the project’s lifecycle.
Stakeholder Engagement

The objectives of the engagement process will be to keep key stakeholders’
knowledge and commitment high by ensuring that they are informed at the right stages
and provided with correct, clear and consistent information throughout the WPL
project. Clear communication will ensure that expectations are consistent and in line
with deliverables.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 41
The development of a Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan
will assist in determining what will be communicated, how it will be communicated, by
when, and by whom, in order to manage Bristol City Council’s readiness to commence
delivery of Stage One of the WPL Route Map.

The questions to consider for each stakeholder are:

• What will be the objectives of each engagement/communication?
• What will be the key messages?
• What information will be communicated and by whom?
• When will information be disseminated and what will be the appropriate
timing?
• What information will be provided and to what level of detail?
• What mechanisms will be used to disseminate information?
• How will feedback be encouraged and what will be done as a result of
feedback?

5.5.2 Communications Plan

The following section looks at the type and frequency of the communication activities
and messages that will be required for each stakeholder group.

In developing the Communications Plan, the Nottingham City Council project team
have considered the potential issues that could pose a threat to the project (e.g.
employers refusing to comply, employees who drive, motorists’ groups, etc.) or provide
support to a WPL (e.g. environmental groups, political support, etc.). The WPL scheme
is still a relatively new idea for those involved and therefore early engagement with
stakeholders will be key to identifying reactions and attitudes, which can then inform
the development of an approach to manage them effectively.

The prospective WPL is a charge for off street parking that will generate funding for
strategic transport projects in order to tackle congestion and provide better
accessibility to all citywide. It is important that stakeholders’ reactions and attitudes to
a WPL scheme are identified as part of Stage One so that the right communication
approaches can be applied throughout the WPL Route Map and that the benefits are
relayed in a targeted manner.

The over-arching intentions of the Communications Plan are to:

• Highlight the justifications for implementing a WPL scheme
• Emphasise the positive aspects of the WPL scheme
• Show how the WPL scheme forms part of the wider strategic vision for
Bristol (The One City Plan, CRSTS, CAZ, JLTP, etc.)

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 42
The rest of the section will focus on some of the key components of the
Communications Plan and illustrates the key considerations which are necessary in
order to gain support for a WPL. The components listed below will be a critical part of
the Communications Plan as they will help shape the messages for the informal
engagement phase (WS1.4) and the public consultation phase (WS2.2).

WPL Spokespeople and Figureheads
The WPL scheme is contentious and there will invariably be strong opposition from
some stakeholder groups. Political leaders will need to be resolute and a strong
leadership figure at the forefront of the project will be a critical success factor, as they
will be recognised publicly as leading the WPL scheme.
The Need for a WPL
The message as to why a WPL scheme is necessary in Bristol must be clear. All
communication strategies and messaging should emphasise the WPL scheme’s
importance in addressing Bristol’s air quality and congestion issues and delivering the
One City Plan. The communications must focus on why the WPL scheme is being
considered, with key messages including that the scheme:

• Targets peak periods of congestion, commuter traffic and air quality
• Does not rely on complex technology - it is a licensing scheme and is
therefore accessible with low-time commitment from businesses
• Will aim to improve air quality and tackle congestion through investment in
sustainable modes of public transport
• Forms part of the wider JLTP plan
• Has both low upfront and running costs

Transport Funding
In a bid to tackle air quality problems, a CAZ is set to be put in place in summer 2022.
It is expected that the introduction of a CAZ will allow Bristol to be compliant with the
national air quality limits.
The follow up to the TCF2 is the CRSTS, with bids for grants being submitted by 2023.
A successful bid could see Bristol City Council being awarded a grant for additional air
quality and congestion tackling measures. It will be necessary to monitor such bids
and liaise with teams responsible for them in order to factor in how the ICTF funding
links in with a WPL scheme. This will ensure that stakeholders and the wider
conurbation understand that grant money further supports the WPL Package, as
opposed to providing revenue to implement the WPL Package.
The income generated by a Bristol WPL scheme would be ring-fenced as part of the
JLTP5 to improve and create a high quality and affordable public transport network
that is accessible around the city. Clarity on the scope to which the WPL funds JLTP5

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 43
projects and where the other funding is being sourced from will be needed so that
communications regarding the use of WPL income are relevant and consistent.
Environmental and Sustainability Issues
Bristol City Council have set a target to become a carbon neutral authority by 2025
and make Bristol a carbon neutral city by 2030. Tackling poor air quality is high on
Bristol City Council’s agenda. The WPL and the WPL Package will assist in achieving
the air quality targets set out in the One City Plan.
Traffic congestion is a significant problem in Bristol, as it is in other major UK cities.
Climate change, health and other environmental concerns currently feature strongly in
international, national and local media, more so than at the time of the development
and implementation of Nottingham’s WPL scheme. For instance, particulate matter is
becoming a major issue for cities; this is an even greater issue in areas of high
congestion where higher levels of particulate matter are caused from braking and
tyres.
Therefore, there should be an emphasis on the role that a WPL scheme plays in
constraining congestion growth, the scheme’s consequential air quality impacts and
the associated health benefits.
Communications Approach and Brand
The tone of WPL communications activity needs to be energetic and determined.
Communications should emphasise how the city is ambitious to move forward and
how the WPL scheme forms part of the overarching vision for the future of transport in
Bristol. Messages need to communicate that this forward momentum is a partnership
approach and businesses need to engage if Bristol is to prosper as a city. The One
City Plan provides the connection between the WPL scheme, the transport
improvements and the wider regeneration of Bristol and this will be beneficial to
continually demonstrate.
Communications activities need to be “human” – they should have
faces/spokespeople, as this approach is recognised as being more effective at
reducing business “mistrust” when contrasted with “faceless” activities such as
promotional literature or websites.
The use of public transport and active travel options are currently being promoted as
a substitute to driving into work in order to improve air quality and constrain congestion
growth, therefore the various Bristol transport organisations are key stakeholders in
the WPL project. Early communications must look to promote the use and expansion
of these services into the high-quality transport and active travel infrastructure that is
envisioned to be delivered as part of the WPL Package.
It is recommended that Bristol’s WPL should have specific branding, while still clearly
being linked to Bristol City Council and reflecting the wider development of Bristol.
Independent branding will ensure that communications are immediately linked with the

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 44
WPL rather than other messages from Bristol City Council and the branding can then
be used on items from the WPL Package which have been funded from the WPL,
ensuring that businesses and residents within Bristol clearly see the benefits of the
scheme. The visual brand for the WPL scheme is still to be developed, however it
should be adaptable in order to reflect the varying preferences of the key stakeholders
in this project.
Key Messages
The details regarding the WPL Package are yet to be agreed, so the key messages
will need to be developed as decisions are finalised. The key messages should target
the particular preferences of target stakeholder groups and fit with the specific
communications channels being employed.
How the WPL Works
The details of the how the WPL scheme operates will be developed as part of Stage
One of the WPL Route Map and will form a key element of later communications.
These messages will become more important as the interest grows in the WPL project,
and as stakeholders start to request practical details regarding the scheme’s operation
and how it will impact upon them.

5.5.3 Communications Responsibilities

Bristol City Council Transport Communications Team
The Governance and Project Team Structure recommends a dedicated
communications resource who will hold primary responsibility for all communications,
planning, management and delivery. The communications role will include:

• Drafting and reviewing communications documents and briefing notes
• Planning and managing key communications events
• Proactive and reactive WPL communications
• Organising media and engagement campaigns
• Measuring and reporting on the effectiveness of communications activity
• Briefing key Bristol City Council representatives on the key messages and
Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan for the
project

Mayor, Bristol City Council Leaders, Councillors and other Figureheads

A proposed WPL scheme needs figureheads and spokespeople to positively influence
businesses and the public through both informal and formal communication methods.
Key responsibilities for these individuals would include:

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 45
• Public communication - through media interviews, additional communication
modes and sponsoring and promoting the WPL scheme using an agreed
core script
• Attending forums and meetings with key businesses affected in order to
promote the WPL scheme.
• The consistent and reliable delivery of agreed key project messages through
more informal means, such as at business networking events and
conferences

Recommendation R21 – Create a Stakeholder Management Strategy and
Communications Plan to identify stakeholders and ensure that their interest levels are
maintained or increased

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 46
5.6 Risk Analysis for Bristol City Council’s Readiness to
Progress Ahead of Stage One

5.6.1 Introduction to Project Risk Management

The following section documents the way in which risk management policy and risk
registers are implemented and managed. The purpose of this section is to assist
project and programme sponsors, project boards and project managers and aid
implementation decisions by enabling effective identification, management and
communication of project risks.

5.6.2 What is Project Risk Management?

Project risk management is the process concerned with identifying, assessing and
responding to project risks and it provides a disciplined environment for informed and
proactive decision making. The objectives of project risk management are to inform
decision making during project selection and definition, as well as improving project
performance during design and delivery. Adherence to project management principles
will assist the successful delivery of projects and lead to enhanced organisational
performance; it will also ensure that business objectives are delivered within the
agreed scope, quality, time and cost constraints.

Risk management forms an integral part of the project management strategy and is
essential in delivering a successful project. The management of risk needs to be fully
embedded into the delivery of a project and forms a key responsibility of the Bristol
City Council WPL Project Manager’s role.
If the WPL project is to be a success, risk management must be conducted and
integrated into the project management process from the start of the project. It is then
important to ensure risk management is upheld throughout the project lifecycle.

5.6.3 Issue Management versus Risk Management

A project issue is anything that can have an impact on a project (either detrimental or
beneficial) and is separate to risk management. Risks that have or will materialise are
no longer risks, they are issues. Issues can arise from a wide range of sources, they
can come in many forms and can occur at any point in the project life cycle. Issues
need to be dealt with as they arise and once identified, need to be captured in the
Change Consent and Issue Log for the project and the Risk Issue Template, as well
as being monitored on an ongoing basis. The impact and seriousness of the project
issues should be evaluated and assessed with any alternative actions that need to be
taken identified. The WPL Project Manager is responsible for managing and checking
the issue log alongside the Risk Register.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 47
5.6.4 Opportunities and Threats

Positive events (opportunities) as well as negative events (threats) need to be
considered when performing project risk management activities. If we consider only
threats when managing a project, then the best that can be expected is to meet the
promised objectives but never improve upon them. If there is an understanding of the
positives and negatives of all the factors that could have an impact on the project, then
the probability of success will increase. It would also reduce the potential for failure
along with any uncertainty of achieving the benefits required.

5.6.5 Risk Considerations in the Proposal and Approval Phase

The most significant project risks, particularly those that threaten the outcomes of a
project, are identifiable in this phase. For new projects, the risk management process
should be commenced at the outset with key risks being captured as part of the start-
up process. During project initiation (Stage One), a risk management strategy for the
project, including defining how risks will be handled during the lifecycle of the project,
should be established.

As risks are identified and assessed, they will be captured in the Risk Register together
with the planned risk mitigation, once these have been agreed. The owner of the risk
should be the manager of the risk management response and it is their responsibility
to execute and manage the agreed response.

5.6.6 Project Risk Management Process

The process described in this section uses six steps:

5.6.7 Methodology

With a project as complex as a WPL scheme, it is imperative that key risks are
identified and mitigated as far as it is reasonably practicable in order to properly inform
and reassure key stakeholders.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 48
In order to compile a Risk Register for Bristol City Council’s readiness to enter the
Stage One development phase of the WPL Route Map, the Nottingham City Council
project team extensively reviewed corresponding risk documents upheld following part
of their scheme implementation. These documents provide a robust starting point for
this risk identification and analysis exercise for the Bristol City Council WPL project.
A list describing constituent risks and the perceived threat level has been compiled
using the matrix below:

Initially, relevant risks were identified by Nottingham City Council and a Risk Register
was drafted, however mitigation activities were not allocated at this early stage.
Following further development, the Risk Register was shared with key officers at
Bristol City Council who were invited to comment ahead of a risk management
workshop. On 16th July 2021, a risk management workshop was conducted with
officers from Bristol City Council and each individual risk was collectively discussed
with input of the local expert knowledge of the Bristol City Council environment by
these colleagues. New risks emerged that were captured, analysed and subsequently
added to the Risk Register.
As part of the discussion with Bristol City Council, mitigation options were suggested,
discussed, rationalised and further developed. The mitigation measures were
subsequently scored and RAG rated, the risks were then allocated owners and this
was then captured in an updated version of the Risk Register.
Risk registers are dynamic in nature and evolve throughout a project. It will be a priority
to create a full Risk Register for Stage One once approval is received to commit
budgets and resources to the delivery of the WPL Route Map along with the
recruitment of the Bristol City Council WPL Project Team. Further risk registers will be

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 49
required for the later stages throughout the WPL project. The current version of the
Risk Register is attached at Appendix I.

5.6.8 Summary of Risk Analysis

In total, 33 risks were identified that were relevant to Bristol City Council in terms of
their readiness to commence Stage One of the WPL Route Map.
Of the 33 risks, 11 were identified as red (high) risks and these should be prioritised
for early mitigation.
A further 17 risks were rated as amber (medium) and mitigation and/or close
management and monitoring is recommended.
The Red and Amber risks are categorised as follows:
Political Climate
Red risks 1 and 2 relate to the political situation affecting the country as a result
of Brexit, which could impact upon Bristol City Council’s WPL proposals and
timescales.
Amber risks 4 and 5 are JTLP related and risk 7 considers the “Levelling Up”
agenda and how, as it is not aimed at Bristol, it may impact on transport
initiatives.
Project Resources
Red risks 8 and 9 and amber risks 10, 12 and 13 pertain to the need for Bristol
City Council to understand the scale of developing a WPL scheme and secure
the relevant approvals and subsequent allocation or recruitment of the Bristol
City Council WPL Project Team in a timely fashion. These risks refer to both
internal and external resources, including specialists, which will be key to Bristol
City Council being ready to commence the Stage One activities contained in
the WPL Route Map.
Communications
There are no red risks and the main amber risks reference the critical need for
all aspects of the communications around the WPL proposals to be cohesive
and consistent, including the need for engagement with key figureheads and
dedicated communications resources.
Adherence to the Nottingham Model
Red risk 22 identifies to need to communicate Nottingham City Council’s
Feasibility Study Report to key officers and politicians.
Amber risk 21 refers to the need to follow the fundamental building blocks of
Nottingham City Council's WPL scheme to reduce the risk of legal challenge,

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 50
deliver value for money and minimise potential delays to the delivery timescales
which would affect the 2024 target delivery date.
COVID-19
There are 4 red risks in this category, 23, 24, 26 and 28, and collectively they
highlight the unknowns in terms of what the “new normal” will look like in terms
of commuting and public transport patronage and the requirement to monitor
these behaviours to determine what impact they may have on a future WPL
scheme.
Other risks that are not referenced above are categorised as:
Amber risks 29 and 32 cite the WECA’s Bus Service Improvement Plan and
initial intention to focus on the Central Core area as positive reasons for
developing and introducing a WPL scheme.
Red risk 33 emphasises the need to monitor the Secretary of State for
Transport’s response to Leicester City Council’s FBC and proposal to
implement a WPL scheme in their city
If Bristol City Council’s ambitious scheme delivery date of 2024 is to be achieved, then
early risk mitigation is recommended to address the risks identified in the Risk
Register.
Successful mitigation of these risks will ensure Bristol City Council commence the
delivery of Stage One of the WPL Route Map in a timely manner, that is robust in all
aspects.
Recommendation R22 – Monitor and regularly update the dynamic Risk Register
document, with risks that are dealt with being closed, new risks being identified as the
scheme develops and adequate mitigation implemented

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 51
6.0 Conclusion and Recommendations for Action

Nottingham City Council has conducted a thorough assessment on the readiness of
Bristol City Council to develop and implement a WPL scheme. The results of that
assessment have been outlined in this Feasibility Study Report.

It is clear that Bristol City Council has an ambitious vision and a clear strategy on how
to achieve this. In particular, Bristol City Council aim to make Bristol a carbon neutral
city by 2030. To achieve this ambitious vision, it is imperative that the transport projects
receive sufficient funding to enable effective implementation and to ensure that they
are of the scale required by the ambition.

Nottingham City Council would also like to highlight the extensive amount of
supporting studies, data and in-depth information already available to Bristol City
Council; this information will positively contribute to the development of a robust WPL
OBC, which will be the key output should Bristol embark upon Stage One of the WPL
Route Map.

For Bristol City Council to achieve a “go live” date of October 2024 for a WPL scheme,
it is essential that the momentum of the past six months is maintained and the WPL
Route Map is initiated.
Ahead of commencing Stage One of the WPL Route Map, the Nottingham City Council
project team recommend the following steps to be carried out as soon as possible:
1. Engage with, inform and provide the senior management team and politicians
with key messages to ensure that they are briefed on the potential WPL
scheme
2. Appoint an experienced WPL Project Manager to begin working through the
WPL Route Map and the recommendations in this report. Undertaking initial
work will ensure that momentum continues and that decision makers are kept
sufficiently informed
3. Liaise with relevant resources to begin the creation of a WPL Project Team,
advising them of what a WPL is, what they will be expected to contribute to the
delivery of a WPL scheme in Bristol, how much of their time is required for the
project and when their involvement will be needed based on the WPL Route
Map
4. Undertake a costing workshop with Nottingham City Council in order to begin
estimating the required budget for each stage and workstream within the WPL
Route Map
5. Track the progress of related schemes which are due to take significant steps
in the next six months (Bristol CAZ, Bus Back Better, Liveable Neighbourhoods)
and assess how any changes impact the proposed WPL Package and the
implementation of a WPL scheme in Bristol

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 52
Further recommendations are set out in Appendix J and have been linked to the
relevant section of the Feasibility Study Report.

Bristol City Council is well positioned to progress with the development of a WPL
scheme and following the advice contained within this report will help to reduce the
time, cost and risk associated with WPL scheme development. Nottingham City
Council will continue to be available to provide its knowledge and experience
throughout Bristol’s WPL Route Map, offering a “critical friend” role and allowing Bristol
City Council to avoid and mitigate the challenges and potential pitfalls involved with
the creation of a WPL. Ongoing engagement with Nottingham City Council will ensure
that any future WPL in Bristol is fit for purpose and delivered as quickly and effectively
as possible, allowing the benefits of the WPL Package to be realised as soon as
practicable. The drive, vision and ambition of Bristol City Council is exciting and will
clearly lead to a high quality, sustainable transport system in Bristol.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 53
7.0 Appendices
7.1 Appendix A: Bristol Key Terms Glossary

Term Abbreviation Description
Atkins Bristol Workplace Atkins Study The Atkins Bristol Workplace Parking Levy Scoping Study 2011 was
Parking Levy Scoping commissioned by Bristol City Council to look into the potential number of
Study 2011 Workplace Parking Places (WPPs) there may be in Bristol for all three
potential WPL schemes (Central Core, Expanded Central Core and Citywide
scheme areas).The study outlines the methodology used by Atkins to
estimate the potential number of WPPs along with the costs to implement
and operate a WPL scheme in Bristol (2011 prices).
Bus Back Better In September 2019, the central government set out the Bus Back Better
strategy. The strategy sets out the vision and opportunity to deliver better
bus services for passengers across England through an ambitious and far-
reaching reform of how services are offered and delivered.
Bristol City Council will be publishing a Bus Service Improvement Plan which
will be developed with local operators, community transport bodies and local
businesses. The plan will set out the strategy and objectives along with a
detailed proposal as to how the objectives will be achieved and bus use will
increase. The Bus Service Improvement Plan will request funding from the
DfT’s COVID-19 Bus Services Support Grant and the Bus Service Operators
Grant in order to deliver the plan20.
Central Core The Central Core area is one of the three geographic options being
considered by Bristol City Council for a proposed WPL scheme. It covers the
major areas of employment within central Bristol and follows the boundary of
city centre activity. From discussions held with Bristol City Council officers,
the Central Core area is the preferred geographic option for a WPL scheme.
Citywide The Citywide area is one of the three geographic options being considered
by Bristol City Council for a proposed WPL scheme. It is the least preferred
option. The Citywide option would cover the entire Bristol City Council
administrative area and would therefore affect all businesses based in
Bristol.
Clean Air Zone CAZ A CAZ is a defined area where vehicles that have tailpipe emissions which
are not compliant with the pollution limits set by a local authority are charged
daily for entering. Bristol City Council are hoping to have a CAZ in place from
Summer 2022. The Bristol CAZ will be for Class D vehicles (cars, private hire
vehicles, taxis, LGVs, buses, coaches and HGVs) and will cover the Bristol
city centre region. The fee for Bristol’s CAZ is set at £9 per day for cars,
private hire vehicles, taxis and LGVs while buses, coaches and HGVs will be
charged £100 per day.
Draft West of England The West of England Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan is a
Local Cycling and significant and exciting first step towards transforming active travel in the
Walking Infrastructure region. The plan proposes capital investment of £411m by 2036 and is the
Plan result of a collaborative effort between the West of England councils, the
WECA and local stakeholder groups.
Expanded Central Core The Expanded Central Core area is one of the three geographic options
being considered by Bristol City Council for a proposed WPL scheme. The
Expanded Central Core corresponds with the area covered by the proposed
Residents Parking Zone “inner ring”, which would discourage parking
displacement on to residential streets by employees of organisations subject
to a WPL.
City Region Sustainable CRSTS The funding provides the necessary major investment for local transport
Transport Settlement priorities. The CRSTS is a follow up investment in local transport networks.
This new fund stems from the announcement made by the DfT that eight
eligible English city regions would receive £4.2 billion of additional funding
for local transport networks.
Joint Local Transport JLTP5 A Joint Local Transport Plan (JLTP) sets out the transport vision for all
Plan 5 authorities within a combined authority. The WECA currently have a JLTP4
that has set out the transport vision from 2020 until 2036. The JLTP4 will be
replaced in 2023 by the JLTP5.

20 Department for Transport – Bus Back Better - link

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 54
A WPL scheme in Bristol will form part of the JLTP5; as well as tackling air
quality and congestion on its own, a WPL will also be used to fund some of
the other measures within the Plan
One City Plan The One City Plan outlines Bristol’s vision for the city in 2050 and confirms
the strategy to achieve the objectives. The plan contains six themes which
are responsible for achieving each objective. Each theme has a governing
board made up of experts and a cross-section of partners and citizens, who
refine the annual objectives as well as ensuring the delivery of the overall
objectives.21 All the initiatives within the One City Plan are underpinned by
the UN Sustainable Development Goals, which provide an internationally
recognised framework to benchmark the city’s aspirations and progress. The
One City Transport Board sits under the “Connectivity” theme and the WPL
scheme will feature prominently as a discussion topic at this forum once the
project begins.
Small Employer Discount Employers who provide below a certain number of LWPPs within the WPL
Threshold scheme area are exempt from paying the WPL charge. However, these
employers are still required to license each year. In Bristol, this threshold is
yet to be determined. In Nottingham, employers and any associated
employers who between them provide 10 or fewer LWPPs in total at all of
their premises within Nottingham City Council’s administrative boundary are
exempt from paying the WPL charge.
Transforming Cities Fund TCF2 The Transforming Cities Fund is a £2.45 billion capital grant transport fund
2 aimed at driving up productivity through investments in public and
sustainable transport infrastructure in some of England’s largest city regions.
The funding is for improvements into infrastructure such as new active travel
routes, smart ticketing and smart traffic controls. The last tranche of the fund
was known as Transforming Cities Fund 2. The WECA received £103 million
of funding as a mayoral combined authority.
West of England The WECA South Gloucestershire Council, Bath & North East Somerset Council and
Combined Authority Bristol City Council make up the West of England Combined Authority.
The WECA was formed in 2017 to champion the region and drive clean and
inclusive economic growth, with a central mayor collectively elected by South
Gloucestershire Council, Bath & North East Somerset Council and Bristol
City Council. The cabinet is made up of the Mayor of the West of England
along with the leaders of each member council.22 Although not included
within the WECA, North Somerset Council is considered a key partner and
for the purposes of the WPL project, their inclusion has been requested.

7.2 Appendix B: WPL Glossary
Term Abbreviation Definition
21 One City Plan - link
22 West of England - link

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 55
Business Support A service currently offered by Nottingham City Council to businesses
within the Nottingham City Council administrative area. The support
includes running workshops and on-site events to provide sustainable
transport advice to staff. Nottingham City Council set up business
support under the Workplace Travel Service team. The team provide
advice and small grants (up to £10,000) to businesses. The grants are
provided to encourage local businesses to support the uptake of
sustainable transport. Examples of what companies use the grant
money for include, car park barriers, changing and shower areas,
bicycle shelters, etc.
Displaced Parking The displacement of commuters from on-site to on-street following the
implementation of a charge (e.g. WPL). In Nottingham, once the WPL
went live there was a displacement of commuter parking; this mainly
occurred at industrial estates where there is usually a lack of on-street
parking restrictions.
Liable Workplace Parking LWPPs A liable workplace parking place is a parking place provided by an
Places employer that is occupied by a vehicle which is used by an employee,
pupil, student or regular business visitor.
A regular business visitor is a consultant, contractor, supplier, agency
staff or other business visitor attending a regular place of work. A
regular place of work is a premises that a regular business visitor parks
at and attends on three or more days over a 14-day period.
LWPPs are parking places that are liable for the WPL charge.
Off-Street Parking Audit OSPA An Off-Street Parking Audit is an activity which the WPL Project Team
may choose to conduct in order to gather a thorough audit of the
potential number of LWPPs a local authority may have within their
designated WPL scheme area. The OSPA is usually conducted as a
survey with employers. The results from the OSPA inform the financial
modelling that is required as part of the FBC which must be submitted
to the Secretary of State for Transport.
Outline Business Case OBC The Outline Business Case sets out the preliminary thoughts regarding
a proposed WPL scheme. It contains the information needed to help
the local authority make decisions regarding the adoption of the project.
It states envisaged outcomes, benefits and potential risks associated
with the proposal. The OBC includes any studies conducted during
Stage One of the WPL Route Map.
Personal Journey Planning A service offered by the Workplace Travel Service team as part of the
business support they provide. Personal Journey Planning is the
assistance of planning journeys to and from work for employees of a
business who wish to use more sustainable methods of transport.
Red Tape Challenge Introduced in April 2011, the Red Tape Challenge was a government-
wide initiative aimed at reducing bureaucracy, giving businesses and
the general public an opportunity to comment on statutory rules and
regulations to decide which should be improved, kept or removed.
The Red Tape Challenge was applied to all areas of transport.
Traffic Management Programme A programme that identifies issues and solutions within the displaced
parking work stream such as junction protection, no waiting and
limited waiting.
WPL Licensing System The WPL Licensing System is an online IT system through which
employers register and update the number of LWPPs that they license
for at each premise.
WPL Route Map The WPL Route Map outlines the key workstreams that a local authority
must undertake and complete to successfully develop and implement
a WPL scheme. The WPL Route Map is based on Nottingham’s
experience as the first and only local authority to have successfully
implemented a WPL in the UK to date.
The WPL Route Map is split into three stages:
Stage One: Scheme Development and Outline Business Case
Stage Two: Public Consultation and Approval
Stage Three: Implementation and Operation.
Workplace Parking Charge WPC The Workplace Parking Charge is a car park management system
introduced by Nottingham City Council following the implementation of
its WPL scheme. The aim of the WPC is to offset Nottingham City
Council’s own car parking liability. The WPC places an annual charge
on Nottingham City Council employees who wish to drive to work and
the charge is taken from an employees’ salary each month. The parking

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 56
charge is graded via salary therefore each individual relatively pays the
same amount in proportion to their salary.
Workplace Parking Levy WPL A Workplace Parking Levy is a charge on employers who provide
workplace parking. It is a type of congestion charging scheme that local
authorities are able to implement under the Transport Act 2000.
A local authority may introduce a WPL to tackle problems associated
with traffic congestion, by both providing funding for major transport
infrastructure initiatives and by acting as an incentive for employers to
manage their workplace parking provision.
WPL Package It is a legal requirement of the primary legislation (Transport Act 2000)
that WPL scheme revenue is ring-fenced for the delivery of Local
Transport Plan policies and objectives. It will be necessary for any local
authority that is considering a WPL to identify what the WPL scheme
will be expected to contribute towards and confirm how it is an essential
part of the delivery of their Local Transport Plan strategy.
Workplace Parking Places WPPs A parking place at a premises inside a local authority’s scheme area,
occupied by a vehicle used by an employee, pupil, student or regular
business visitor. Workplace parking places are not necessarily marked
or designated spaces. All employers may provide WPPs. For example,
a disabled parking place is still considered a WPP.
WPL Operational Team The WPL Operational Team is comprised of administrative and
operational staff. The administrative staff respond to emails and phone
calls, assisting employers with payment and licensing issues. The
operational staff visit premises within the administrative boundary to
ensure that employers are licensing correctly and assist with any
queries face-to-face. In Nottingham, the operational staff take a
compliance based approach and work with employers on an
educational basis to ensure that they licence correctly.
WPL Project Team The WPL Project Team are responsible for developing and
implementing a WPL scheme. The WPL Project team will usually
consist of a programme manager, project manager, project officers,
administrative staff and specialists. The WPL Project Team will work
with consultants and other service areas across the local authority to
successfully develop and implement the WPL scheme.
WPL Scheme Order A WPL Scheme Order is a required legal document that sets out the
details of the WPL scheme. It is the legal means by which WPL is
implemented. No WPL scheme can be applied without an approved
scheme order as it is the secondary legislation that permits a local
authority to run a WPL scheme.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 57
7.3 Appendix C: WPL Route Map

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 58
7.4 Appendix D: Milestones and Dependencies Timeline

30/01/22
01/06/23 01/01/25
Bristol Liveable
Joint Local Transport Plan 5 02/05/24 Free public transport travel
Neighbourhoods
Approved UK General Election to be offered to U25s
policy sign off

01/01/24 - 03/06/24
City Centre
Redevelopments 31/05/25
06/05/21 30/07/22
- St Mary Le Port Target date for BCC
Local, Mayoral and Bristol Clean Air Zone (CAZ) 03/06/24 - 31/12/24
- Gallery’s to be Carbon Neutral
WECA elections is implemented Strategic Corridors

01/01/2022 01/01/2023 01/01/2024 01/01/2025 01/01/2026 01/01/2027
05/04/2021 31/05/2027

01/01/23
29/10/21 09/05/24 01/10/24 09/05/25
Compliance year
WECA Bus Service Improvement Local and WPL charging WECA Elections
for clean air targets
Mayoral commences
Elections

30/06/22 - 31/03/27
City Region Sustainable Transport Settlements

Italics = dates that are not fixed.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 59
7.5 Appendix E: Timeline for a Bristol WPL Scheme

30/01/2023 - 21/04/2023
01/11/2023 - 29/03/2024 01/10/2024
05/04/2021 - 27/08/2021 6-12 week
WPL Implementation WPL 'Charging Commences'
WPL Feasibility Study Public Consultation

01/04/2024 - 27/09/2024
09/08/2022 - 29/10/2022 30/05/2023 - 29/10/2023
WPL 'Go Live'
Outline Business Secretary of State - No Charging
Case Production Approval for WPL

05/04/2021 01/01/2022 01/01/2023 01/01/2024 31/10/2024

01/11/2022 - 30/10/2023 01/11/2023 - 31/10/2024
01/10/2021 - 29/10/2022
Stage Two - Stage Three -
Stage One -
Public Consultation and Approval Implementation and Operation
Scheme Development and
Outline Business Case

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 60
7.6 Appendix F: Governance and Project Team Structure
Recommended BCC WPL Project Structure for Stage One
One City Transport Board
Mayor/ The Economy & Skills Board
Deputy Mayor The Environment Board
Meet Quarterly WECA The Health & Wellbeing Board
Directors The Homes and Communities Board
Head of City Transport

WPL Steering Group
Inward Investment
Head of City Transport
Economic Development
Principal Transport Planner
Meet every 6 weeks Traffic Management Development
Comms Lead
Public Transport
NCC Advisors
Transport Strategy
WPL Project Manager

Lead Manager

Meet weekly

Project Manager
Project Support

Internal External

Economic Commu nicatio ns Pro ject
Leg al Finance Par liamentary Transport
Development Offi cer Manag ement
Age nts Consultants
Consultants

Info rma tion , Busine ss
WPL Pack age NCC WPL Economic Imp roveme nt
JLTP L ead Pro cure me nt Govern ance &
Lead Officer Sup port Consultants District and
Risk
Busine ss Foru m

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 61
7.8 Appendix G: Stakeholder Radar

BCC Employees
(4.11)

Directors/Head of Services & Managers
(3.11)

Councillors
(3.12)
Executive Director –
Growth & Region
Green
(2.12) BCC External
Organisations
(3.41) Corporate Leadership Communications/Press The Federation
Board Office of Small Business
(2.11) (2.13) (3.21)
Local Lobbyist
Groups Chamber of
- For Commerce (2.41) Employers Employers
- Against L/M (3.25)
(3.42) Local Media 1Deputy Mayor x2 + Top 5/10
(2.42) (1.12) & (1.13) (2.21)
Residents Visitors/
One City Boards National Media
NHS (3.22) Conurbation
- Economy & Skills (2.43)
(2.22) (4.21)
- Environment Mayor
Public Health
- Health & WECA Mayor (1.11)
(2.44)

N
(1.42)
G C
BCC Wellbeing
V
DfT
Trade Unions (3.43) West of England (1.41)
Specialist High
(4.41) Combined Authority
E-Mobility End Businesses University of West
Operators (2.45) (2.23) of England
(3.44) Business West One City (3.23)
(2.48) Transport Board University of Bristol
Property
(1.31) (2.24)
Developers Destination Bristol
in Central Area (2.47)
Employees/ Trade
(3.45)
Unions
MPs (3.24)
Campaign Groups (2.46)
(3.46) Public Transport Operators (Bus Infrastructure (2.32) Business Improvement
companies) Districts
Equality Groups (3.25)
(2.31)
(3.47)

Joint Local
Transport Plan (JLTP) (3.31)

National
Transport Groups (3.32)

Level Meaning
V Vital to engage
N Necessary to engage
G Good to have
engaged
C Courtesy to inform

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 62
7.9 Appendix H: 2X2 Power/Influence by Interest in WPL
Matrix

High 1.11
1.12
1.41 1.13
2.46 3.41
Influential Observers: Key Players:
Keep Satisfied 2.11 2.12 Engage Closely
2.42 2.44 1.31
1.42
2.43 3.12
3.42 2.31
Power/
3.46 3.22 3.24 2.48 2.13
Influence
2.45 2.41
3.24
3.11 3.23 2.24
2.23 2.21
3.21 3.25
3.45 2.32 2.22 3.31
2.47
Spectators: Active Players:
3.32
Monitor 3.44 Keep Informed
4.21 3.47 3.43
4.41
4.11
Low

Low Interest in High
WPL

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 63
7.10 Appendix I: Risk Register

CONSTITUENT RISKS TO BE MANAGED
Latest
Opening
Threat
Threat
Constituent Risk Description Risk Management Counter Measures & Actions Status Owner Level
Level e.g.
e.g.
2x4=8
2x4=8

Political Climate

As the UK moves out of the transitional period and into a post- The impacts of Brexit are still emerging and there is the
Brexit economy, there could be negative impacts on employers in possibility that the COVID-19 pandemic is also masking the
the short to medium term. Any negative impacts on employers impacts. Engagement held with Bristol City Council officers
may reduce the political will for a WPL scheme in Bristol, which in indicated that they accept that businesses may seek to use
turn could see the development of a scheme being delayed or Brexit/COVID-19 as a reason to avoid/delay the need to
even postponed. deal with poor air quality and the issue of congestion. A
1 3 4 12 Open AC 3 4 12
strong Stakeholder Management Strategy and
Communications Plan with key messages that are
supported by facts will help Bristol City Council to put
forward the need to tackle poor air quality and congestion
now more than ever.

The unknown impact of Brexit on the government and local The impacts of Brexit are still emerging and there is the
authorities could cause delays in the short to medium term plans possibility that the COVID-19 pandemic is also masking the
to implement a WPL scheme in Bristol, which impacts the target impacts. A post-Brexit and post-COVID-19 economy could
2 3 5 15 Open AC 3 5 15
October 2024 “go live” date. mean that there are grants and funding available from the
government, which strengthens the case for a WPL.

The awarding of grants from the government to local authorities The government has promised local authorities additional
for sustainable transport projects/transport infrastructure plans money for public transport infrastructure (buses) and active
could pose a threat to the likelihood of approvals for future WPL travel. However, the grants will not be enough to fund the
3 schemes. 3 4 12 future sustainable transport projects for local authorities. Open AC 2 3 6
As a result, schemes such as a WPL will be viewed as a
positive as it will show the government evidence of match
funding.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 64
The JLTP5 is not yet drafted or approved, therefore any delays in The current JLTP4 was seen to not go far enough
the approval of the plan could undermine the DfT sign-off of a regarding tackling climate change. It is envisaged that the
future WPL scheme. JLTP5, which is expected to be signed off by mid-2023, will
4 3 4 12 look to showcase Bristol's vision to be a carbon neutral city Open AC 2 3 6
by 2030. It is felt by Bristol City Council officers that the
JLTP5 will not be a threat to the sign-off of a WPL scheme.

There is a risk that the WPL scheme or WPL Package for Bristol Bristol City Council officers will contribute towards the
are not included in the JLTP5; this would undermine or reduce the development of the JLTP5 to ensure that the WPL scheme
5 scope of the WPL scheme as the ring-fenced funding is a legal 3 4 12 and supporting WPL Package for Bristol are included. Open AC 2 3 6
requirement under the Transport Act 2000.

The 2021 elections saw a new Labour Mayor elected for the West Bristol City Council officers will ensure a close working
of England. While it is early days, there is a risk that differing relationship between the policital leaders and seek an
priorities between the West of England Mayor and Mayor of Bristol agreement in advance of the work packages that are to be
could see a delay to a potential WPL scheme, due to differences funded. The WPL will remain a Bristol City Council function
over the WPL package and operation of infrastructure funded by and not a WECA function. However, it will be key to get an
6 a Bristol WPL. The new WECA Mayor will have a higher profile 3 3 9 agreement on the work packages that are to be funded in Open AC 2 3 6
than his predecessor, therefore will want to be seen as being order to tackle congestion, improve air quality and help
involved in delivering sustainable transport improvements across solve the WECA aims of regeneration.
the WECA.

The national consensus is that Bristol is a “well-off” region, While the region is externally seen as less in need of
therefore there is uncertainty regarding the level of support from levelling up than other areas, it is evident that Bristol has
7 central government which Bristol City Council will receive for the 4 4 16 significant areas of deprivation that require investment in Open AC 4 4 16
WPL project and transport projects in general. transport infrastructure to level up across the region.

Project Resources

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 65
If Bristol City Council does not recruit or faces delays in procuring There is a common activity (restructure) taking place at
the resources recommended in the project structure, then there Bristol City Council. This process will review project
could be significant delays to the project which would put the management resourcing and seek to ensure appropriate
8 provisional target October 2024 “go live” date at a high risk of 3 5 15 provision is made for all projects. Bristol City Council Open AC 3 5 15
failure. recently went into contract with a strategic partner, Arcadis.
This will also enable use of additional resources as
required.
There is insufficient understanding and appreciation of the amount Consider using VOA/business rates databases to gather
of work and resources required for Stage One of the WPL Route detailed data on employment “make-up” within Bristol.
9 Map e.g. for studies/data etc. and the necessity for this 3 5 15 Open AC 3 5 15
information to inform the OBC, communications activity etc.

If key Bristol City Council officers move on, the WPL project could Bristol City Council acknowledges this is always going to
be delayed due to loss of knowledge transfer, expertise and be a risk but is not deemed as a high risk.
10 4 4 16 Open AC 2 4 8
continuity.

If Bristol City Council do not engage expert WPL advisors in some Bristol City Council will be engaging with consultants who
capacity during Stage One, then they could face increased costs have proven experience of delivering and operating WPL
11 and timeframes during the scheme development phase. The 3 5 15 schemes. Open AC 1 4 4
quality of the scheme offer could also be reduced.

Bristol City Council not acquiring or being delayed in engaging Bristol City Council will be engaging with the relevant
12 with the appropriate external specialist consultancy support that 3 4 12 specialists to ensure that there are no delays to the Open AC 2 4 8
will be necessary for the successful delivery of Stage One. successful delivery of Stage One.
The time taken to procure and secure the appropriate resources Bristol City Council officers will be holding early
for the WPL Project Team means that there may be a delay in the engagement with the Bristol City Council procurement
13 transfer of knowledge, understanding, scope and details of 3 4 12 team to identify issues and resolve any potential problems Open AC 2 4 8
delivering a WPL scheme; leading to progress in delivering Stage and delays.
One workstreams being delayed.
If Bristol City Council does not ensure that an updated parking Bristol City Council officers agree that urgent parking data
survey is commissioned prior to or early on in Stage One, then the must be prioritised on the Central Core and some on the
financial modelling and ultimately the OBC will not be robust and Expanded Central Core.
14 3 4 12 Open AC 2 4 8
will be liable to challenge.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 66
Communications

If key internal stakeholders are not adequately briefed and "on Bristol City Council officers will prepare briefing documents
message" and inaccurate information is put into the public for key internal stakeholders to ensure that they are
15 domain, then the development of the WPL scheme could be 3 4 12 adequately briefed and "on message" at all times. Open AC 2 2 4
inhibited in certain areas and there could be revenue implications.

A lack of communications activity with the appropriate Bristol City Council has internal communications
stakeholders will result in delays to the workstreams and project, specialists in mind for a WPL project.
16 as well as misinformation regarding the project. There is a need 3 4 12 Open AC 2 3 6
for an experienced Communications Officer.

There is a risk that if a communications strategy is not in place Bristol City Council will be using the Feasibility Study
with consistent and detailed proactive and reactive key messages, Report and appendices produced by Nottingham City
then inconsistencies with information released by Bristol City Council to develop their communications strategy.
17 3 4 12 Open AC 2 3 6
Council into the public domain could result in misinformation,
undermining the integrity of the scheme.

It is essential to have a key figure(s) to front and represent the Adam Crowther will be providing an update on the WPL to
WPL scheme proposal. Any changes in this key figure(s) will have Councillor Don Alexander, Cabinet member for Transport.
18 a detrimental impact on the promotion and reputation of the 3 5 15 Open AC 3 3 9
scheme, especially in Stages One and Two.

Any delays to an approved vision outlining the benefits of the WPL The Bristol City Council WPL Project Team will link the
scheme could see increased objections from employers, resulting WPL deliverables to the One City Plan and communicate
19 in negative media coverage and making it more difficult to gain 3 4 12 into the public domain. Open AC 2 3 6
scheme approval, particularly in the context of the Red Tape
Challenge review to address key business concerns.
Any delays to an approved vision outlining the benefits of the WPL The Stakeholder Management Strategy and
scheme could see delayed support and less vocal backing from Communications Plan workstream identifies a suite of
environmental groups during the informal engagement/public products to be developed for target groups. Engagement
consultation process, making it harder for Bristol City Council to with the environmental lobby as early as practicable is
20 3 3 9 Open AC 2 2 4
gather wider support. recommended. Bristol City Council officers will be
engaging with the environmental lobby as a priority once
all the necessary requirements required for the OBC have
been fulfilled.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 67
Adherence to the Nottingham Model

Nottingham City Council are in a unique position as the only local Bristol City Council recognise the need to follow the
authority to have developed, delivered and operated a WPL fundamental building blocks of Nottingham City Council's
scheme. If Bristol City Council choose not to follow the WPL scheme and are cognisant of the availability of advice
fundamental building blocks of Nottingham’s WPL scheme, then and experience from Nottingham City Council’s
21 any Bristol WPL scheme is at higher risk of legal challenge, 3 5 15 practitioners as to how Bristol’s scheme would benefit from Open AC 2 2 4
leading to increased costs for further scheme design and potential Nottingham's learning to reduce risk, optimise expenditure
delays to the delivery timescales and the target October 2024 “go and achieve the target delivery date.
live” date.
Bristol City Council does not identify and allocate the necessary Bristol City Council officers will communicate the Feasibility
funding for the internal/external resources that are required to Study Report via briefings to key officers/politicians. The
commence the delivery of Stage One and associated engagement with key officers and politicians will allow the
workstreams. Bristol City Council officers to identify potential costs,
timescales and risks

22 3 5 15 Open AC 3 4 12

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 68
COVID-19

The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has had an effect on the The effect of COVID-19 on businesses and their ability to
ability for local businesses to operate and their performance. The operate is still unknown. Nottingham City Council can
end of the extended furlough scheme could see some businesses provide data based on the licensing behaviour of its
reduce operations leading to a smaller number of liable employers employers that are licenced for the WPL scheme. It is felt
within a future Bristol City Council WPL scheme area. There is a that in the short-medium term, there will not be the same
possibility that this could reduce the total number of LWPPs. levels of provision as pre-COVID levels. The post-COVID
working arrangements will need to be reflected in the
financial model. The furlough scheme now requires a
23 3 4 12 contribution from employers, however the whole scheme Open AC 3 4 12
has been extended until 30/09/21 and therefore the impact
will not be known for some time. Bristol City Council is
considering a target October 2024 “go live” date - it is
expected a clearer picture will be visible by then. Bristol is
seeing an increase in traffic volumes. The availability of
other modes of transport delivered as a result of a WPL
scheme is a positive.

The outbreak of COVID-19 has seen an increase in the number The situation is dynamic and the medium-long term
of employees working from home. The ability and practicality of implications of COVID-19 on the provision of LWPPs is as
some employees being able to work from home could see yet unknown. It is felt likely that there will not be the same
businesses downsize their office space and in turn reduce the levels of provision as pre-COVID and this will need to be
number of LWPPs they provide. reflected in the financial model. Nottingham City Council
can provide data based on the licensing behaviour of its
employers as a result of COVID-19.
24 3 4 12 It is yet to be seen what the impact of COVID-19 is on some Open AC 3 4 12
businesses. The new post-Covid working models are
unknown, therefore Bristol City Council will be monitoring
to gain a clearer picture. Bristol City Council officers agree
that the best reference point is the Nottingham WPL
Licensing System and how this is being impacted.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 69
Further clarity is required on the vision of a WPL in the context of The situation is dynamic and the medium-long term
enhanced public transport plans (S-M-L). Additionally, the implications of COVID-19 on the use of public transport is
prevalence of social distancing measures until the “new normal” as yet unknown. Whilst there will be a short-medium term
could lead to concerns about increased investment in public reduction in the patronage of public transport, it is felt likely
transport infrastructure. that pre-COVID levels will be seen at some future stage
and public confidence will return. The government
published a Roadmap to Recovery with an end to social
25 2 4 8 distancing on 19th July 2021 and return of remaining Open AC 2 4 8
industries. Public transport patronage is to be monitored by
Bristol City Council. The government’s extensive vaccine
programme rollout is ongoing. The ongoing risk posed by
COVID-19 variants, e.g. at present the Indian/Delta variant
appears to be prevalent and the impact on further lockdown
restrictions in Bristol should be monitored.

The long-term impacts of social distancing on public transport The vaccination program is underway and will be ongoing.
usage/capacity is as yet unknown and should be kept under As the restrictions begin to ease, it is expected that more
review during scheme development. There is a risk that there people will return to the workplace and public transport
could be reduced patronage on public transport, which could usage will increase too.
26 3 4 12 Open AC 3 4 12
impact upon the proposed WPL package. The WPL vision may
therefore need to be reviewed.

The economic impact felt by S-M-L businesses from the effects of Bristol City Council will be monitoring the recovery of
COVID-19 could lead to increased non-cooperation as part of the businesses and a sensitive approach will be adopted.
data collection during the OSPA, which undermines the financial Bristol City Council will be undertaking proactive
27 model and the OBC. 3 3 9 stakeholder engagement when engaging with businesses, Open AC 3 3 9
to ease fears.

The long-term effects on physical and mental health as a result of Bristol City Council officers will monitor the situation.
the COVID-19 pandemic could lead to commuters being more
28 reliant on cars as opposed to using public transport. 4 4 16 Open AC 4 3 12

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 70
Other

Bus Back Better strategy – if Bristol City Council receives Bristol City Council officers feel that receiving a significant
significant funding then the scope of the WPL Package could be amount of funding from the Bus Back Better strategy could
reduced. If less funding is required for the WPL scheme then it make it easier to implement a WPL scheme. There will
29 could put the project and scheme in doubt. 3 4 12 never be enough money for the city's transport needs. WPL AC 2 3 6
revenue would still be required for a mass transit system,
as outlined in the One City Plan.

The implementation and direct impact of a CAZ could see air The CAZ is not expected to significantly reduce traffic
quality levels reduce significantly. As a result, there may be no volumes and is not expected to have a significant impact
need for a WPL scheme. on the requirement for a WPL scheme. The potential issue
30 3 5 15 Open AC 2 2 4
of "double charging" of vehicle users i.e. pay the CAZ and
a WPL charge by their employer, will offset the WPL
liability.
If Bristol City Council do not have an effective procurement Bristol City Council opts for a middle ground for projects
strategy in place to commission studies and bring in expert such a WPL. They will use a mix of internal resources and
consultants, they could face delays in initiating and completing the consultants, as appropriate. Bristol City Council has a
31 4 4 16 Open AC 2 3 6
WPL Route Map to develop and implement a WPL scheme. strategic partner which could see a greater use of
consultants. Bristol City Council also has a strategic
partner for procurement.
The Bristol City Council desire and justification to develop a WPL Bristol City Council officers are confident that initially a
scheme may be reduced if the potential number of places is less Central Core scheme can be delivered, with a view to
32 than the estimates of the Atkins Study. 4 4 16 expanding in the future. Open AC 3 3 9

If the Secretary of State for Transport rejects Leicester City Bristol City Council officers will monitor the situation.
Council’s WPL FBC then this could have a bearing and impact on
33 the Bristol WPL scheme development. 4 4 16 Open AC 4 4 16

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 71
7.11 Appendix J: Recommendations

Reference Page(s) Recommendation
Review relevant economic, transport, congestion, air quality, deprivation and social
R1 11
inclusion/exclusion studies and ensure that they are up to date
Assess the need to commission new studies where information in current studies is out
R2 11
of date
Carry out an OSPA to understand the “make-up” of employers and form a baseline
R3 11
dataset for scheme development
Commission Nottingham City Council to conduct a desktop parking exercise using
R4 12 multiple regression analysis and based on Nottingham’s live WPL Licensing System, to
estimate how many LWPPs Bristol may have
Model the transport, financial and economic elements of the WPL scheme to illustrate
R5 12
how it would operate and fund future transport projects
R6 13 Introduce a risk management strategy and regularly update the Risk Register
R7 13 Draft a WPL Scheme Order
Introduce and progress the displaced parking workstream to tackle the potential
R8 13
displacement of commuter parking
Consider the introduction of a car park management scheme at Bristol City Council
R9 13
premises, where commuter parking occurs
Outline the transport package that will be funded by the revenue generated from a WPL
R10 14
scheme
Develop a detailed public consultation programme including specified timeframes,
R11 16
activities and methodology
Carry out a robust public consultation programme to engage and consult with all key
R12 17
stakeholders
Monitor the new working arrangements and commuter travel behaviour as a return to a
R13 22-23 “new normal” begins, following the lifting of lockdown restrictions as a result of the
COVID-19 pandemic
R14 24 Regularly review and update the Milestones and Dependencies Timeline
Conduct a “feet on the ground” OSPA that factors in any questions from the previous
R15 26
Atkins Study
Identify and include any existing displaced commuter parking counts in the WPP
R16 26
estimations (for example, on-street parking around industrial estates)
Review the list of sites visited by Atkins and cross-reference with VOA data, in order to
R17 27
begin categorising employers by size and industry
R18 28 Conduct further research into the cost of parking provided by private companies
Conduct a survey in Stage One to further understand commuter behaviour across the
R29 29
Bristol region
Follow the Governance and Project Team Structure outlined in Appendix F and Section
R20 31-36
5.4
Create a Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan to identify
R21 37-44
stakeholders and ensure that their interest levels are maintained or increased
Monitor and regularly update the dynamic Risk Register document, with risks that are
R22 45-49 dealt with being closed, new risks being identified as the scheme develops and adequate
mitigation implemented

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 72
Key Contacts:
Jason Gooding
Head of Parking, Fleet and Transport Operations
Email: jason.gooding@nottinghamcity.gov.uk
Nigel Hallam
WPL Service Manager
Email: nigel.hallam@nottinghamcity.gov.uk

Copyright © 2021 by Nottingham City Council

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, transmitted in any form or
by any means, including photography, recording or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the
prior written permission of Nottingham City Council, or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms
agreed with the appropriate reprographics rights organisations.

Permission requests should be sent to Jason Gooding, Head of Parking, Fleet and Transport Operations,
Nottingham City Council, Loxley House, Station Street, Nottingham, NG2 3NG.

Full acknowledgement of the author and source must be given.
