Public Document Pack

Transport & Connectivity
Policy Committee
Agenda

Date: Thursday, 19 March 2026
Time: 5.00 pm
Venue: The Council Chamber - City Hall, College
Green, Bristol, BS1 5TR

Distribution:
Councillors: Ed Plowden (Chair), Graham Morris (Vice-Chair), Rob Bryher, Nicholas Coombes,
Emma Edwards, Tom Renhard, Tim Rippington, Kaz Self and David Wilcox

Issued by: Sam Wilcock, Policy Committee Officer
City Hall, College Green, Bristol BS1 5TR
E-mail: policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk
Date: Wednesday, 11 March 2026
Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee – Agenda

Agenda
1. Welcome, Introductions and Safety Information
(Pages 5 - 7)
2. Apologies for Absence and Substitutions

3. Declarations of Interest
To note any declarations of interest from councillors. They are asked to
indicate the relevant agenda item, the nature of the interest and in particular
whether it is a disclosable pecuniary interest.

Any declaration of interest made at the meeting which is not on the register of
interests should be notified to the Monitoring Officer for inclusion.

4. Minutes of the Previous Meeting
(Pages 8 - 25)
5. Chair's Announcements
To receive any announcements from the Chair.

6. Public Forum
Up to 30 minutes is allowed for this item.

Any member of the public or councillor may participate in Public Forum. Public
Forum items must relate to the remit of the committee and should be addressed
to the Chair of the committee.

Members of the public who plan to attend a public meeting at City Hall are
advised that you will be required to sign in when you arrive. Please note that you
will be issued with a visitor pass which you will need to display at all times.

Please also note:

Questions
1. Written public questions must be received by 5.00 pm, at least 3 clear
working days prior to the meeting. For this meeting, this means that
questions must be received at the latest by 5.00 pm on Friday 13 March.
Public Questions should be submitted via our webform:
www.bristol.gov.uk/publicforum
Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee – Agenda

2. Any individual can submit up to 3 written questions.
3. Written replies to questions will be available on the Council’s website at
least one hour before the meeting.
4. At the meeting, questioners will be permitted to ask up to 2 oral
supplementary questions.

Statements
1. Written statements must be received at latest by 12.00 noon, at least 2
working days prior to the meeting. For this meeting, this means that
statements must be received at the latest by 12.00 noon on Tuesday 17
March. Public Statements should be submitted via our webform:
www.bristol.gov.uk/publicforum
2. Statements, provided they are no more than 1,000 words in length, will
be circulated to all committee members and will be published on the
Council’s website at least one hour before the meeting.

Petitions
1. Details of the wording of any petitions, and the number of signatories to
petitions must be received at latest by 12.00 noon, at least 2 working days
prior to the meeting. For this meeting, this means that petition details
must be received at the latest by 12.00 noon on Tuesday 17 March.
Please email petition details to policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk
2. At the meeting, individuals presenting petitions may be required to read
out the objectives of the petition.

When submitting a question or statement please indicate whether you are planning
to attend the meeting to present your statement ask your question

7. Road Safety Task and Finish Group - closure report
To provide information outlining the key outcomes of the Road Safety Task and (Pages 26 - 41)
Finish Group

8. 20 mph Review
To update the Committee on the 20mph review, including an evidence review (Pages 42 - 73)
and technical assessment. This report seeks approval to launch a six-week public
engagement on the outcomes of that technical assessment.

9. Incentive Funding
To seek approval to accept and spend the proposed Incentive funding allocation (Pages 74 - 85)
from West of England Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA) as part of the City
Region Sustainable Transport Settlement (CRSTS).
Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee – Agenda

10. Workplace Parking Levy Update report
To update the committee on progress with the Workplace Parking Levy Outline (Pages 86 - 102)
Business Case (OBC) and to outline progress on key project milestones.

11. Policy Committee Work Programme Setting - Outcome Report
To note the work programme outcomes of the six monthly work programme (Pages 103 - 107)
setting workshop, with particular focus on the coming 2026/27 municipal year.

Information note – Officer Executive Decisions
Please note that the Council publishes details of Officer Executive Decisions that have been taken. These
are decisions which do not meet the criteria for a formal key decision to be taken at a Policy Committee
meeting, but are considered to be important enough to be open to public scrutiny. This includes all
Officer Executive Decisions involving a resource commitment of between £100,000 and £500,000 taken in
consultation with the relevant Policy Committee Chair. Officer Executive Decisions are also published
when a key decision has been to a Policy Committee and authority delegated to an officer to take the
decision. Details can be found here:
Officer executive decisions (bristol.gov.uk)
Agenda Item 1
www.bristol.gov.uk

Public Information Sheet
Inspection of Papers - Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985

You can find papers for all our meetings on our website at www.bristol.gov.uk.

Public meetings for Policy Committees are held at City Hall.

Attendance at Public meetings

Bristol City Council welcomes public attendance and participation at all of its formal committee
meetings. When attending public meetings please behave with courtesy, tolerance and respect at
all times to Councillors, Council Officers and other meeting participants. Attendees who cause
disturbance may be asked to leave or, may be removed from the meeting.

If you’re a member of the press or public and want to attend a public meeting at City Hall, you will
need to sign in when you arrive. You will be issued with a visitor pass which you will need to
display at all times.

Due to the maximum occupancy of the venue, you may be asked to watch the meeting on a screen
in another room.

Other formats and languages and assistance for those with hearing impairment
Other o check with and
You can get committee papers in other formats (e.g. large print, audio tape, braille etc) or in
community languages by contacting the Policy Committee Officer. Please give as much notice as
possible. We cannot guarantee re-formatting or translation of papers before the date of a
particular meeting.

Committee rooms are fitted with induction loops to assist people with hearing impairment. If you
require any assistance with this please speak to the Policy Committee Officer.

Public Forum
Members of the public may make a written statement, ask a question, or present a petition to
most meetings. Please ensure that any submissions made are respectful, factual, and relevant.

• By contributing to the public forum process the participant acknowledges that any content
submitted is at the authors own risk and the Council disclaims any obligation or
responsibility for it.
• Questions, Statements and Petitions should be factually based and should not contain
anything that could be construed as being defamatory, frivolous or offensive. Any

Page 5
www.bristol.gov.uk

submission including such information shall be redacted prior to publication without notice
to the author.
• The Council reserves the right to reject any submission it deems defamatory, frivolous or
offensive at its sole discretion.
• Sensitive personal information may be deleted or redacted
• Officer’s names below Head of Service, will be replaced by the Officer’s job title
• Company names may be deleted or redacted

Your statement or question will be sent to the Committee Members and will be published on the
Council’s website before the meeting.

Public Questions and Statements should be submitted via our webform:
www.bristol.gov.uk/publicforum

Petitions should be e-mailed to policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

The following requirements apply:

• The statement is received no later than 12.00 noon two working days before the meeting and
is about a matter which is the responsibility of the committee concerned.
• The question is received no later than 5pm three clear working days before the meeting.

Any statement submitted should be no longer than one side of A4 paper. For copyright reasons,
we are unable to reproduce or publish newspaper or magazine articles that may be attached to
statements.

By participating in public forum business, we will assume that you have consented to your name
and the details of your submission being recorded and circulated to the Committee and published
within the minutes. Your statement or question will also be made available to the public via
publication on the Council’s website and may be provided upon request in response to Freedom of
Information Act requests in the future.

We will try to remove personal and identifiable information. However, because of time
constraints we cannot guarantee this, and you may therefore wish to consider if your statement
contains information that you would prefer not to be in the public domain. Other committee
papers may be placed on the council’s website and information within them may be searchable on
the internet.

During the meeting:

• Public Forum is normally one of the first items on the agenda, although statements and
petitions that relate to specific items on the agenda may be taken just before the item
concerned.
• There will be no debate on statements or petitions.

Page 6
www.bristol.gov.uk

• The Chair will call each submission in turn. When you are invited to speak, please make sure
that your presentation focuses on the key issues that you would like Members to consider.
This will have the greatest impact.
• Your time allocation may have to be strictly limited if there are a lot of submissions. This may
be as short as one minute.
• If there are a large number of submissions on one matter a representative may be requested
to speak on the groups behalf.
• If you do not attend or speak at the meeting at which your public forum submission is being
taken your statement will be noted by Members.
• Under our security arrangements, please note that members of the public (and bags) may be
searched. This may apply in the interests of helping to ensure a safe meeting environment for
all attending.
• As part of the drive to reduce single-use plastics in council-owned buildings, please bring your
own water bottle in order to fill up from the water dispenser.

For further information about procedure rules please refer to our Constitution
https://www.bristol.gov.uk/how-council-decisions-are-made/constitution

Webcasting/ Recording of meetings

Members of the public attending meetings or taking part in Public forum are advised that Policy
Committee meetings may be filmed for live or subsequent broadcast via the council's webcasting
pages. The whole of the meeting is filmed (except where there are confidential or exempt
items). If you ask a question or make a representation, then you are likely to be filmed and will be
deemed to have given your consent to this. If you do not wish to be filmed you need to make
yourself known to the webcasting staff. However, the Openness of Local Government Bodies
Regulations 2014 now means that persons attending meetings may take photographs, film and
audio record the proceedings and report on the meeting (Oral commentary is not permitted
during the meeting as it would be disruptive). Members of the public should therefore be aware
that they may be filmed by others attending and that is not within the council’s control.

Our privacy notice can be viewed at www.bristol.gov.uk/about-our-website/privacy-and-
processing-notices-for-resource-services

Page 7
Agenda Item 4

Bristol City Council
Minutes of the Transport & Connectivity
Policy Committee

5 February 2026 at 5.00 pm

Members Present:-
Councillors: Ed Plowden (Chair), Rob Bryher, Nicholas Coombes, Emma Edwards, Tom Renhard,
Tim Rippington, Kaz Self, David Wilcox and Mark Weston

1 Welcome, Introductions and Safety Information

The Chair welcomed all attendees to the meeting and explained the emergency evacuation procedure.

The Chair asked the Committee members to introduce themselves

2 Apologies for Absence and Substitutions

Apologies were received from Councillor Morris. Councillor Weston was in attendance as substitute.

3 Declarations of Interest

There were none.

4 Minutes of the Previous Meeting

The minutes of the previous meeting were agreed as accurate

Page 8
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

5 Chair's Announcements

The Chair provided the following updates:
• Delegated Officer Decision Notices have been published on the Council’s website.
• The East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood data pack, along with the associated survey results, has been
published since the last meeting.
• The statutory consultation on proposed changes to the Residents’ Parking Schemes has concluded.
Proposals relating to the number and cost of visitor permits will be paused to allow further consideration of
the feedback received. Other proposed changes — including charges for business e-vehicles and the
removal of the free 30-minute period on pay-and-display machines — will continue through the decision-
making process.

6 Public Forum

The Chair extended the time taken for public forum to 40 minutes.

The Committee noted that the following public forum had been received.

Public Petitions
There were no public petitions presented to the Committee at this meeting.

Public Statements
90 statements were received and noted as follows:

Ref No Name Title
01 Chris Boateng A Request to Reduce the Dangers of the East Liveable
Neighbourhood Traffic Plan for St. Patrick’s Primary
School and Local Residents
02 Cllr Nicholas Coombes Residents' Parking Visitor Permits
03 Matthew Bessey Car and Bike Owner
04 Jan Ratcliffe South Bristol Liveable area pollution

05 Jon Nicholls Objections to RPS changes
06 Claire Wheeler Objection to the Proposed Bus Gate on Park Street,
Bristol
07 Cllr Ed Fraser Councillor statement in support of Rosemary Lane
proposal
08 Geraint Dewi Short statement in support of SLN
09 Ewan Gimson In support of low-traffic neighbourhoods
10 Nicholas Davies South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
11 Matthew Symonds Support for South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
12 Leila Nicholas South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
13 Esme SBLN

Page 9
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

14 Clare Hartland Calascione Proposed changes to RPZs
15 Melanie Osborne In support of SBLN
16 Christine Khalif SBLN - I do not agree
17 Robert Harakis “The Expeditious, Convenient and Safe Movement of
Traffic”
18 Matt Sanders Cumberland Road Bus Gate: a Disgraceful Officer
Response
19 Gillian Alexander-Davis A Kingsdown resident’s statement in response to
suggested RPZ changes.
20 Amanda Edmondson South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood and North Street
21 Charlotte Gage Support for Rosemary Lane improvements
22 R Sargent Rosemary Lane Pocket Park
23 Sarah Griffiths Streetspace 2 - Rosemary Lane
24 Erica Rooney Rosemary Lane
25 Clare Robinson Rosemary Lane safety measures
26 Jacqueline Beavington Objection to the closure of Rosemary Lane
27 Jolanda Anderson Rosemary Lane BS5 Proposal
28 Liberty Fletcher Gardener Rosemary Lane - oppose plans
29 Marcus Dawson Objection to proposals CAE/RGW/P-1334A &
CAE/RGW/P-1334B
30 Melissa Topping Transparency, Safety, and Disability Exclusion in the
East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood (EBLN)
31 James Maven Coles Support of Park St Triangle scheme
32 Andrew Renshaw and Tony Impact of housing expansion in South Gloucestershire
Hoare on tne A4018 and adjacent roads in Westbury-on-Trym
33 Daisy Lee Rosemary Lane closure
34 Michael Potts Objection to proposed bus gate on Park St.
35 Ben McClatchey In support of Rosemary lane changes
36 Rachael McClatchey Extremely supportive of rosemary lane changes
37 Ren Renwick, RWA Statement in Support of the Place-Making Ambitions
of the Transport Proposals
38 Cllr Jenny Bartle Item 9 Rosemary Lane Cllr support
39 Cllr Patrick McAllister Support for Park Street Proposals
40 Hamish McClatchey Support for proposed changes of Rosemary lane

41 Joanna McClatchey Walking/cycle access
42 Emily Cant Rosemary lane pedestrianised/cycle path
43 Alan Morris Statement from Bristol Walking Alliance
44 Samir Savant Statement in Support of the Place-Making Ambitions
of the Transport Proposals from Samir Savant, CEO, St
George’s Bristol
45 James Bennett Changes to Rosemary lane
46 Rosa Kell Bus Services
47 Esther Tyler Ward Rosemary lane

Page 10
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

48 Christina Biggs Bristol Clean Air Zone
49 Joff Charters Rosemary Lane Mini Liveable Neighbourhood Proposal
50 Jonathan Brecknell Park Street Highways Works
51 Katy Evans Rosemary Lane support for safety measures
52 Jamie Walker Streetspace 2: Denmark St and Rosemary Lane
53 Rebecca Pearson Rosemary lane safety
54 David Redgewell Transport Issues
55 Amanda Stark Rosemary lane proposals
56 Carolyn Rogers Parking for Blue Badge Holders
57 Megan Smith Net Zero; the reason behind the Liveable
Neighbourhood schemes
58 Lucy Goldring Improvements to Rose Lane near May Park primary
school

59 Dan Ackroyd Park Street/Triangle.
60 Gemma Smith May Park Primary
61 Councillor Kelvin Blake Denmark Street/ Disabled People
62 Anja Dalton Approval for Rosemary Lane works
63 James Alexander The St John’s Lane Fiasco
64 Satyen Joshi SBLN - TIME TO SEE WOOD FOR THE TREES?
65 Jack Pearson Rosemary Lane Safety Measures
66 Danielle House Rosemary lane
67 Helen Hughes The dangers of oversimplifying climate science when
using it as a basis for public policy making
68 Tom Swithinbank Bristol BID - Denmark Street Support
69 Matt O'Donnell Rosemary Lane
70 Ruby Lloyd-Shogbesan Equity for Disabled Children and Parents
71 Ian Pond, Chairperson Bristol Statement in support of officers recommendation re:
Cycling Campaign Bus Route 2/A4018/A37 WP3, Park St/Triangle scheme
72 Kate Stanley-Dunn Safety measures Rosemary Lane
73 Dan Wilson St Johns Lane drawing not provided
74 Teri Bramah Statement of Opposition to the SBLN
75 Adam Cattle SBLN Support statement February 2026
76 Elizabeth Newton SBLN
77 Joseph Thomas Don’t Back Down on Safety - Support for SBLN
78 Tessa Lidstone Safer streets
79 Thomas Chambers Support for SBLN and changes to Park Street
80 Katie M Support for SBLN and prioritising people and place in
Bristol
81 Thom Harvey My support for the SBLN
82 James Bambury Park Street & SBLN
83 tobias parker SBLN
84 Jordan Hills Support for South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood

Page 11
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

85 Brendon Taylor Disabled Transport Services
passengers advocate for south
west England
86 Caroline Dunn Transport Money
87 First West of England Statement to the Transport & Connectivity Policy
Committee
88 Councillor Paula O’Rourke Park Street
89 Barbie Wilde Rosemary Lane Safety Measure
90 Joel Breen Rosemary Lane Safety Measure

Statements 2, 7, 14, 18, 20, 30, 39. 43, 46, 54, 56, 57, 59, 67, 74 and 76 were presented to the Committee.

Public Forum Questions
108 questions were received as follows:

Ref No Name Title
01, 02 & Nell Pursey 01 – EBLN
03 02 – SBLN
03 – Fishponds Road
04, 05 & Bob Reeves 04 – Avon Gorge Hotel Parking
06 05 – Sunday Parking
06 – Visitor Parking
07 Cllr Nicholas Coombes 07 – Residents Parking Visitor Permits
08 Mr Shaban Ali 08 – Is lost of confidence justified?
09, 10 & Judith Worthington 09 – Cameras
11 10 – Improving Bus Services to Southville
11 - Health Claims ignoring mental health
12, 13 & Pippa Nesbit 12 – 2025 stats for CAZ cameras
14 13 – 2025 Stats for CAZ Roads
14 - Top Five CAZ Roads
15 James Fox 15 – Increased Residents Parking Charges
16, 17 & Jan Ratcliffe 16 – Traffic Redistribution and Need by South Bristol
18 Liveable area
17 – Safety and environmental impact caused by
proposed South Bristol Liveable Area
18 - Fairness and Impact on the High Street When
South Bristol Liveable Srea implemented
19, 20 & Jon Nicholls 19 – Financial Implications
21 20 – Objectives of changes to RPS
21 - Equalities Act
22, 23 & Matt Sanders 22 - Cumberland Road Bus Gate: Missing Sign in
24 Merchants Road
23 - Cumberland Road Bus Gate: Why was
Enforcement Not Suspended?
24 - Cumberland Road Bus Gate: Inconsistent Signage
25, 26 & Helen Hughes 25 - Can committee members lead by example

Page 12
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

27 26 - Are committee members all aware of the
significance of net zero in transport policy
27 - Fears of transport chaos as a result of increasing
population
28, 29 & Robert Harakis 28 - Which Traffic Surveys are relevant?
30 29 - How was the Data compiled?
30 - Or is there NO relevant traffic data…?
31, 32 & Christina Biggs 31 - Are there any preliminary results of Air Quality
33 monitoring from January 2025-December 2025 in Air
Quality Management Areas in Bristol?
32 - Has traffic modelling been conducted to predict
the effect of raising the CAZ charges as suggested to
the Environment and Sustainability Committee in
December 2025?
33 - Air quality and traffic modelling of the possible
effect of decarbonising the Bristol bus fleet
34 Mark Bailey 34 - South Bristol liveable neighbourhood project.
35 & 36 Nicola Elliott 35 – Coronation Road & North Street
36 – Data on traffic in Southville
37, 38 & Satyen Joshi 37 - BRISTOL ROAD NETWORK LAYOUT: INEFFICIENT
39 and SUB-OPTIMAL?
38 - SBLN - TIMESCALES FOR PUBLISHING RESIDENT
CONSULTATION SURVEY RESULTS & TRAFFIC
MONITORING SURVEY
39 - SOUTHVILLE RPZ : UPDATE OF TRO - CAE/NME/P-
1343
40 & 41 Paul Collins 40 - The need for an Equality Impact Assessment
41 - Unjustified difference in proposed parking
charges
42 Megs Smith 42 - On who's authority can local council close the
roads?
43, 44 & Gray Craven 43 - Cost of painting the EBLN Pavement Art
45 44 - Cost of painting the City Centre Mural
45 - Cost of painting a Zebra Crossing
46, 47 & Jesse Zyla 46 - 90 Faded Signs around St Luke's Road
48 47 - Missing Sign in St Luke's Road
48 - Obscured Sign in St Luke’s Road
49, 50 & Melissa Topping 49 - Permanent TRO" vs. "Trial" Contradiction
51 50 - On the Blackswarth Road School Crossing
51 - On the Full Business Case (FBC) and WECA
52 Alexander Smith 52 - East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood - Marsh
Lane Bus Stops
53 Naisent Yacob 53 - EBLN uncomfortable
54 Mark Aspin 54 - BCC CPZ parking charges and policy
55, 56 & James Alexander 55 – St John’s Lane Signage Compliant…?
57 56 – Transport Chair’s representations to the Police

Page 13
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

57 - St John’s Lane Camera Certificate not Renewed?
58, 59 & Lynda Keeys 58 – Road Markings
60 59 – South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood (SBLN)
60 - SBLN
61, 62 & Alistair Onebanjo 61 - City Centre bus gate stats
63 62 - City Centre bus gate signage
63 - “The same rate for a long period of time”
64 & 65 Christina Wilkinson 64 – Congestion
65 - Excess traffic Troopers Hill Rd
66 & 67 Caroline Hunt 66 – equality impact assessment
67 - How we will know of the outcome of these
changes?
68 & 69 Alan Morris 68 – Question from Bristol Walking Alliance: revised
CRSTS allocations - 1
69 - Question from Bristol Walking Alliance: revised
CRSTS allocations – 2
70 & 71 Stephen Wickham 70 – What CAZ NOX monitoring is there on
Coronation Road, BS3 ?
71 - What proportion of Traffic using Coronation
Road is non-compliant with CAZ rules and is this
changing other than by fleet renewal?
72, 73 & Nicholas Davies 72 – CRSTS Funding
74 73 – Triangle Cycle route
74 - Doing what will work not what doesn't
75, 76 & Jennifer Hill 75, 76 & 77 – Ban HGVs on Marlborough Hill
77
78 Eveline Hall 78 – Parking in Bus and Bike Lanes
79, 80 & Abi Salinger 79, 80 & 81 – SBLN Proposal, Impact on Local
81 Residents
82, 83 & Sue Hughes 82 – On the Full Business Case (FBC) and WECA
84 83 – Greengage report on EBLN
84 - On the "Permanent TRO" vs. "Trial" Contradiction
85, 86 & Councillor Guy Poultney 85 – Road Closure / Weight Limit - Marlborough Hill
87 86 – Outdoor Hospitality - Licensing Local Businesses
87 - Residents' Parking Schemes in Cotham - Visitor
Permits and 30 Mins Free Parking
88, 89 & Rosa Kell 88 – Bristol University Hospitals Trust public transport
90 access
89 – Cut in Bus Grant
90 - Bus Forum
91 Elizabeth Newton Southville Air Quality Data for SBLN
92, 93 & David Redgewell 92 – Air Quality
94 93 – Peak Time Bus Lanes
94 - Bus Services Grant Cuts
95, 96 & Caroline Dunn 95 – Park Street
97 96 – Bus Gate Exemptions

Page 14
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

97 - EBLN
98, 99 & Brendan Taylor 98 – Traffic Diversion via Park Row (BRI)
100 99 – Infrastructure for Accessibility of Bus and Rail
Stations
100 - Bus Pass Accessibility Before 09:00
101, 102 Teri Bramah 101 – SBLN Compensation and workability for those
& 103 affected by longer journeys
102 - SBLN Business Proposal Transparency and
Community Engagement
103 - SBLN Concerns related to traffic congestion,
health and safety

Those who attended the meeting were invited to ask up to two supplementary questions. The following responses
were given:

Q24 – Matt Sanders
Officers confirmed that the differences in signage were due to the technical reasons listed in the question. The
Chair stated that officers provide photographs to illustrate specific examples and that he verifies the information
rather than accepting it at face value.

Q25 – Helen Hughes
The Chair confirmed that the reports accompanying each proposal include an environmental impact assessment,
which accounts for both the carbon savings and the emissions generated during construction.

Q42 – Megs Smith
The Chair explained that the Council follows the laws and regulations that apply today, noting that modern legal
frameworks have developed considerably since historic documents such as the 1215 Magna Carta.

Q49 & 50 – Melissa Topping
The Chair noted that while the process for amending a Traffic Regulation Order (TRO) is relatively straightforward,
it does require a significant amount of time to complete. The full business case is expected to be presented to
Committee in Summer 2026, aligning with the West of England Combined Authority Mayor’s review and taking into
account current pressures on officer capacity.

Q70 & 71 – Stephen Wickham
Officers explained that, historically, Air Quality compliance monitors have been placed in locations considered most
at risk of non-compliance. New monitors have now been installed on Coronation Road which, while not previously
identified as a high-risk location, will allow data to be gathered on conditions before and after for if a scheme is
implemented. Officers also noted that traffic monitoring is carried out across the wider area, with the
highest-impact sites typically located in the City Centre due to the density and height of buildings.

Q75 – Jennifer Hill
Officers explained that Area Committees consider local changes to the transport network that may be delivered
using delegated Section 106 contributions or Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) funding. Technical officers are
expected to attend Area Committee meetings where potential funding awards are being considered. Given the
level of demand, proposed schemes will need to be assessed and prioritised. Officers also noted that Section 106

Page 15
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

funding is usually tied to specific locations or purposes, but decisions on allocations rest with the relevant Area
Committee.
Action: Officers to confirm who will attend the Area Committee meeting on 4 March and whether Marlborough
Hill is expected to be discussed.

7 Progress Towards the Bristol Climate and Nature Partnership's Inclusive Transport
Vision

The Committee received an information report outlining progress against the key themes identified in the Inclusive
Transport Vision produced by the Bristol Climate and Nature Partnership, along with the planned future direction
of work.

The Head of City Transport introduced the report. In discussion, Members raised the following points:

• The Vision had been informed by a broad range of public views, with accessible transport and clean air
identified as key areas where improvements were most desired.
• The Parking and Kerbside Strategy Task and Finish Group had been progressing work on accessibility and
inclusivity.
• The extension of disabled bus passes to allow 24 hour use was welcomed as a positive step towards
improving accessibility in public transport.
• New bus routes and night time services had been introduced following the work of the cross party
Supported Bus Services Task and Finish Group. Members expressed hope that these services would
continue; however, no update was available at the meeting. Action: Members requested data on the
impact of the new bus routes and night time services.
• Members highlighted the importance of effective implementation and clear communication with
communities when changes are introduced.

Following the discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by
Councillor Coombes.

On being put to the vote, the recommendations were CARRIED (with 5 voting for, 3 abstentions and 1 against). It
was APPROVED that;

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity

1. Endorsed the continued work towards fulfilling aims outlined within the Inclusive Transport Vision, as part of
the Golden Motion to make Bristol the UK’s most accessible city.

2. Noted City Transport’s progress towards implementing the recommendations within the report.

3. Endorsed the commitment to report back in December 2026 on further progress made. This recommendation
was supported by the Committee Chair.

Page 16
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

8 City Regional Sustainable Transport Settlement Update

The Committee considered a report that set out the current position of the City Region Sustainable Transport
Settlement (CRSTS) programme referencing the recent rebaselining exercise undertaken by the West of England
Mayoral Combined Authority and the Bristol City Council input into that process. Approval was also sought for that
approach that the Park St Triangle scheme be funded through other funding streams to reduce pressure on the
programme.

This was a key decision report as it involves over £500k and impacts 2 or more wards. An exempt appendix was
contained at Appendix E.

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report, first with reference to recommendations 1 to 9.

Following Members clarification on elements of the report, officers confirmed the following points regarding
recommendations 1 to 9:
• The section of Fairfax Street (before it goes under the Galleries) would include two new bus stops. Buses
would then not stop again until Broad Weir/ Lower Castle Street.
• Regarding the A4 Portway, officers confirmed that a phased approach was taken to enable completion by
March 2027. Some early works – such as drainage and kerb installation - had incurred higher-than-expected
costs. A project review had reconsidered whether the contingency remained sufficient. Overall, a
contingency allocation of approx. 20% was allocated across the programme, with regularly review planned
throughout delivery.
• The A4 Portway scope included full resurfacing, in coordination with the highway maintenance plan. A short
section of kerb works had been descoped just south of the tunnel where pavement use is light.
• The scope of public realm improvements on University Road had been reduced by around 60%. There
remained the potential for some elements to be reintroduced if unallocated contingency became available
later in the programme.

Members were reassured that strong public communication and ongoing engagement would continue throughout
the programme, including through the dedicated website www.bristolonthemove.com.

Following the discussion, report recommendations 1 and 2 were noted.

Recommendations 1 to 9 were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Self. On being put to the
vote, recommendations 3 to 9 were CARRIED unanimously.

In response to Members’ requests for clarification on elements of the report, officers provided the following points
in relation to recommendation 10:
• Areas of complexity within the scheme included the relocation of cameras, associated civil engineering
works, and the statutory Traffic Regulation Order (TRO) process. Officers anticipated bringing the Full
Business Case to the Policy Committee in July 2026 for a decision on the completed trial scheme. Some
exemptions—such as the Victoria Avenue point closure—might be delivered earlier.
• Changes were subject to completion of the full statutory TRO process and consideration of the objection
report.

Page 17
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

• Officers advised that if the proposed budget changes were not approved, the planned changes could not
progress. Having committed to the trial scheme, it was important that the process continued to enable a final
decision to be made based on the evidence gathered.

Recommendation 10 was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Wilcox. On being put to the
vote, recommendation 10 was CARRIED (5 voting For, 1 against, with 3 abstentions)

In response to Members’ requests for clarification on elements of the report, officers provided the following points
in relation to recommendation 11:
• Officers reiterated the importance of reaching a decision point that would allow options for a final scheme to
be presented once the evidence-gathering stage is complete.
• Officers explained that the costs within the Full Business Case (FBC) for Liveable Neighbourhood schemes
reflect the extensive engagement required and the associated officer time needed to analyse responses. The
work involves multiple smaller design elements across the whole area, alongside technical analysis for the
FBC. Project costs therefore include officer time across several teams—engineering, engagement, monitoring
and data collection—as well as programme and project management. Officers confirmed they continued to
explore opportunities to deliver the work as efficiently as possible.
• Analysis of engagement responses was currently underway, with the aim of presenting the FBC in September
2026.
ACTION: Officers to update Councillors on the timeline for reporting engagement findings.
• Initial monitoring considered the wider area to understand traffic flows. The scheme then focused on specific
locations, with monitoring packages installed accordingly.
• Officers advised that if the proposed funding source was not approved, work on the scheme would stop, and
some revenue reversion would be required to cover costs incurred to date from alternative budgets.
Broader costs were suggested as the loss of future active travel, health and transport benefits.
• Existing air quality monitors had been placed in locations within the City where legal compliance could be a
concern. Air quality is typically monitored over a 12-month period. Early data for the East Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood (EBLN) area indicated improvements, but firm conclusions could not be drawn until a full
12-month dataset is available. Additional monitors have been installed in the proposed South Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood (SBLN) area, including Coronation Road, to assess the scheme’s impact.

Following the debate, recommendation 11 was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Bryher.
On being put to the vote, recommendation 11 was CARRIED (5 voting For, 4 voting against).

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report with reference to recommendations 12 to 20.

Following Members clarification on elements of the report, officers confirmed the following points regarding
recommendations 12 to 20:

• Regular meetings continue to take place with the Bristol Royal Infirmary (BRI) regarding this and other
projects, and no concerns have been raised to date.
• Officers explained that the scheme was expected to deliver an immediate positive impact on air quality, with
the aim of achieving compliance by 2027. Compliance must be demonstrated over a full 12-month period at
every designated monitoring location, using standardised methods such as de-weathering, and then
sustained for at least a further year.

Page 18
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

• Empirical air quality data to assess the impact of the introduction of electric buses would be available for
consideration once a full 12-month dataset had been collected. Data from 2025 was expected to be
published later this year.
• The distinctions between empirical data, modelling outputs and anecdotal evidence was highlighted.
• If the scheme were not approved, officers would re-engage with the Joint Air Quality Unit (JAQU) regarding
compliance with Air Quality Directives compliance. JAQU’s focus was on improving air quality on Colston
Avenue, where levels had worsened despite other locations showing improvement.
• If approved, implementation of the scheme would begin with bus gates to allow buses to benefit
immediately and to create space on Park Street for works on Park Street. Officers were confident that
contractors could be on site August/September 2026.
• Traffic modelling had not been undertaken for a part-time or peak hour closure of Park Street. Peak-hour
traffic typically accounts for 30-35% of daily flows. Officers emphasised that a peak-hour operation would
significantly reduce the effectiveness of the scheme by limiting traffic reduction, reducing modal shift, and
affecting overall network efficiency. A 12-hour operation had been considered but was not supported by the
Combined Authority.
• Modelling indicated improvements in bus journey times of around 6 minutes during peak hours and 4
minutes off-peak. As bus services from many directions pass through the Park Street area, these
improvements could support greater network reliability and allow operators to reinvest in services
elsewhere.
• The significant investment of approx. £2m from an alternative funding source would reduce pressure on the
Council’s maintenance budget and associated officer time. Some roads around the Triangle were prioritised
for resurfacing within the next 5-10 years.
• Potential loss of parking revenue had been considered alongside wider strategic transport benefits. It was
expected that demand for parking could be met by the two nearby multi-storey car parks. This work formed
part of the wider Transport Investment Strategy.
• Officers noted that the Park Street scheme aimed to reduce traffic in both directions and would support
future mass-transit ambitions by helping to reduce traffic volumes and enable greater segregation along city
centre routes.
• Officers confirmed that the 10 interventions previously submitted to JAQU as agreed actions included
measures such as extending travel benefits, improving access to the financial assistance scheme and
upgrading the Council’s fleet.
Action: Officers to circulate the full list of interventions to Councillor Renhard.

During the debate the following comments were made:
• Some Members expressed concern about the potential impact on air quality and traffic congestion around
the city’s hospitals..
• Ward Councillors reported that residents had raised concerns about the effect of the scheme on road access
to the wider city centre, including the potential impact on businesses if private vehicle access to the area
were reduced.
• Some Members felt that Clean Air Zone (CAZ) funding might be better directed towards supporting public
transport across the city, including additional assistance for supported bus services and night-time routes,
and that the scheme was more appropriate to be funded using CRSTS funds.
• Members also suggested that the Transport and Movement Plan would provide an appropriate framework
for discussing future routing of private vehicles through the city.

Page 19
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Following the discussion, report recommendations 12 to 14 were noted.

Report recommendations 15 to 20 were then moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Edwards.

An amendment was moved by Councillor Wilcox to add the following recommendation, (as recommendation 21):

21. All of the above to apply to a scheme operating 7am to 7pm, seven days a week with a formal review on the
hours of operation to take place and come back to Committee when compliance is achieved.

The Amendment was seconded by Councillor Edwards.

On being put to the vote, the amendment (as recommendation 21) was CARRIED (with 4 voting For, 4 voting
against and 1 absention. The Chair used his casting vote).

On being put to the vote the substantive recommendations 15 to 21 FELL with 4 members voting FOR, 5 Against).

It was APPROVED that;

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:

Regarding CRSTS Rebaseline

1. Noted the contents of the CRSTS Rebaseline Change Request (Appendices A1 and A2, paras 1-9) and associated
documents as submitted to the Combined Authority including changes to budget allocations and
project/programme completion dates
2. Noted further papers will come to the Transport and Connectivity Committee seeking approval for full
business cases and associated budget allocations for South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood, East Bristol
Liveable Neighbourhood, Streetspace 2, Concorde Way, WP4, WP5 and the Regional Cycling Hub when ready.
See paragraphs 7e and 7f of the report.

For Decision
3. Authorised the Executive Director for Growth and Regeneration in consultation with Chair of the Transport
and Connectivity Committee to take all steps required to secure vacant possession of a further kiosk on
Merchant St as per paragraph 11 of the report.
4. Approved an increase to the budget for the Portway Main Corridor scheme of £1.359m to £23.1m as set out in
paragraph 7b of the report.
5. Approved the proposed scope reductions for the Broadmead/Union St scheme as set out in the report,
paragraph 7a and Appendices A1 and A2.
6. Approved the proposed scope reductions for the Redcliffe Roundabout scheme as set out in Appendices A1
and A2 of the report.
7. Approved the proposed scope reductions for the Bedminster Bridges scheme as set out in Appendices A1 and
A2 of the report.
8. Approved the proposed scope reductions for the Portway Main Corridor scheme as set out in Appendices A1
and A2 of the report.
9. Approved reallocation of unused funds to cover any scope reduced as above should budget be available

Page 20
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Regarding EBLN
10. Approved the temporary allocation to EBLN of £1.82m of the £10m CAZ CRSTS match funding and £0.6m of
£10m CAZ Local Transport funding until the EBLN change request is resolved with the MCA as set out in
paragraph 7e of the report.

Regarding SBLN

11. Approved a £1.32m increase to the current allocation for SBLN from £0.6m to £1.92m to enable completion
of the FBC as set out in paragraph 7f of the report and the temporary allocation of £0.57m of CAZ Local
Transport funding should this be needed.

Regarding Bus Route 2 WP3/Park St/Triangle

Noting only
12. Noted that committee approved the submission of a Full Business Case for A4018/A37 WP3 to the West of
England Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA) but that, as the remainder of the scheme will be funded by FAS
and CAZ income, approval of the MCA is no longer required as per paragraph 12 of the report.
13. Noted the legal requirement for Bristol to achieve air quality compliance in the shortest time possible and
the contribution of the Park St/Triangle Scheme to achieving this as per paragraphs 13-15 of the report.
14. Noted that approval to begin the procurement process was already given by Transport and Connectivity
committee in February 2025 so no further approval is required here.

Recommendations 15 to 20, with recommendation 21 added as an amendment were not approved.

15. Approves the use of £5.3m FAS funding to deliver the bus gate elements of the scheme including the Triangle as
set out in red in Fig1 as set out in paragraphs 16-18.
16. Approves the use of CAZ CRSTS match funding to deliver the remaining elements of the scheme as set out in
blue in Fig1 and paragraph 19.
17. Approves the proposed scope reductions as set out in this report paragraph 21.
18. Approves the additional works proposed for Park Row/Upper Maudlin St as per Appendix A6 and paragraph 22.
19. Authorises the Executive Director of Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of the Transport &
Connectivity Committee and Section 151 officer to take all steps required to procure and award contracts and
invest the funding to deliver the works as set out in the Full Business Case up to the maximum budget
envelope outlined in this report.
20. Authorises the Executive Director of Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of the Transport
and Connectivity Committee and Section 151 officer to invoke any subsequent extensions/variations
specifically defined in the contract(s) being awarded, up to the maximum budget envelope outlined in this
report.
21. All of the above to apply to a scheme operating 7am to 7pm, seven days a week with a formal review on the
hours of operation to take place and come back to Committee when compliance is achieved.

9 Streetspace 2: Denmark St and Rosemary Lane

Page 21
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

The Committee considered a report that sought approval to submit the Full Business Case (FBC) for Streetspace 2:
Denmark Street and Rosemary Lane, to accept and spend funding for Streetspace 2 and to award any contracts
required to construct the approved schemes.

This was a key decision report as it relates to a decision involving over £500k and would impact more than 2 wards.
The report returned to Committee following first consideration at the 4 December 2025 meeting.

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report. The following points were clarified in response to
Members questions and through discussion:

Denmark Street
• Members thanked officers for providing additional drawings with the report, which confirmed continued
access to the Hippodrome.
• Accessible parking bays for Blue Badge holders would be retained on Gaunt Lane. Officers confirmed that
the scheme would only progress once disability groups were satisfied, noting that the Disabled People
Strategic Travel Advisory Group had expressed support for the proposal as presented.
• Denmark Steet is currently open one-way vehicular access towards the centre.
• Engagement with local businesses had been positive. Retaining traffic would limit improvements due to
narrow footways and constrained space, and proposed changes were expected to have a positive impact on
businesses.

Rosemary Lane
• The proposed changes would create a more pleasant route for walking, cycling and scooting. A school “Bike
Bus” initiative in the area had been well received but was undermined by continued rat-running on Rosemary
Lane.
• It was suggested that other options could be explored to improve the route, including the removal of parking
allocations and reallocating space to sustainable transport, to enhance the road environment without
requiring full closure.
• There was concern by some Members that the objections to the scheme outweighed support. Officers
confirmed that Ward Councillors were in support of the scheme and that the technical advice recommended
the closure.

Following the discussion, report recommendations 1 and 3 were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by
Councillor Bryher.

On being put to the vote recommendations 1 and 3 FELL (with 4 voting For, 5 against).

Report recommendations 2 and 4 were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Rippington.

On being put to the vote recommendations 2 and 4 were CARRIED unanimously.

It was APPROVED that the Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee:

1. Authorised the Executive Director of Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of the Transport
and Connectivity Committee to submit the FBC for Denmark Street to WECA and accept and spend the funding

Page 22
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

should it be approved, in-line with the procurement routes and maximum budget envelope outlined in the
report.

2. Authorised the Executive Director of Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of the Transport
and Connectivity Committee to take all steps required to procure and award any contracts required to construct
the approved Denmark Street scheme, including any contracts over the key decision threshold , and to invoke
any subsequent extensions/variations specifically defined in the contract(s) being awarded, up to the maximum
budget envelope outlined in the report.

Recommendations 1 and 3 as outlined in the report were not approved:

1. Authorises the Executive Director of Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of the Transport
and Connectivity Committee to submit the FBC for Rosemary Lane to WECA and accept and spend the funding
should it be approved, in-line with the procurement routes and maximum budget envelope outlined in this report.

3. Authorises the Executive Director of Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of the Transport
and Connectivity Committee to take all steps required to procure and award any contracts required to construct
the approved Rosemary Lane scheme, including any contracts over the key decision threshold , and to invoke any
subsequent extensions/variations specifically defined in the contract(s) being awarded, up to the maximum budget
envelope outlined in this report.

10 Early delivery bus stop scheme - A4 Bristol to Bath Strategic Corridor (BBSC)

The Committee considered a report that sought approval to accept funding from WECA for the early delivery bus
stop scheme - A4 Bristol to Bath Strategic Corridor (BBSC) and approval to procure and award contracts for the
scheme, in line with the necessary procurement routes and maximum budget envelopes outlined in this report and
conditional on WECA’s confirmation to proceed following receipt of market pricing.

This was a key decision report as it related to a decision involving over £500k.

Councillors were satisfied with the report and published information. There were no questions or points of
clarification sought from officers.

The report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Rippington.

On being put to the vote the recommendations were CARRIED unanimously.

The Committee for Transport and Connectivity:

1. Accepted the funding from WECA for the Early delivery bus stop scheme - A4 Bristol to Bath Strategic
Corridor (BBSC), noting that WECA have confirmed that there is no financial risk to BCC resulting from an
overspend.

Page 23
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

2. Authorised the Executive Director for Growth and Regeneration in consultation with Chair of the
Transport and Connectivity Committee to procure and award all necessary contracts and to spend the funding
associated with the ‘Early Works Bus Stops on BBSC’ project in-line with the maximum budget envelopes
outlined in the report.

11 Performance management report – Q2 2025/26

The Committee considered the report which updated the Transport & Connectivity (T&C) Committee on the latest
quarterly performance measures – with a focus on Tier 1 measures (including Business Plan metrics and actions)
plus selected Tier 2 metrics.

It was noted that this was a report for information.

There were no question or points of clarification sought.

The Transport and Connectivity Committee noted the Performance progress report.

12 Q3 Corporate Risk Report 2025/26

The Committee considered the report which updated the Transport & Connectivity (T&C) Committee on current
significant strategic risks, relevant to the Transport and Connectivity Committee, to achieving the Council’s
objectives as set in the Corporate Strategy 2025-2030 and summarises progress in managing the risks and.

It was noted that this was a report for information.

There were no question or points of clarification sought.

The Transport and Connectivity Committee noted the report.

13 Quarterly Finance Report: P8 / Q3

The Council Revenue and Capital budget for 2025/26 was agreed by Full Council on 25 February 2025. The report
presented to the Transport and Connectivity Committee the financial forecast at Period 8 (P8) against the budget as
at the end of November 2025.

It was noted that this was a report for information.

There were no question or points of clarification sought.

The Committee for Transport and Connectivity noted the contents of the report on the P8 forecast.

Page 24
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Meeting ended at 9.10 pm

CHAIR __________________

Page 25
Agenda Item 7

Committee Report

KEY DECISION OR FOR INFORMATION: For Information

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 19 March 2026

TITLE: Road Safety Task and Finish Group Closure Report

Ward(s): Citywide

Officer presenting the report: Adam Crowther Job title: Head of City Transport

Committee Chair: Cllr Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: Committee Chair

Purpose of Report:
1. To provide information outlining the key outcomes of the Road Safety Task and Finish Group.

Evidence Base

1. The Road Safety Task and Finish Group was established to steer the scope and overarching aims of
the new Road Safety Strategy. The full Terms of Reference for the Group can be found in the
background documents.

Alternative options considered:

1. N/A

Officer Recommendations:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:

Notes the information provided in the closure report (Appendix A) which will inform the drafting of a
road safety strategy. The strategy will be brought to Transport and Connectivity Committee in due
course for approval.

Corporate Strategy alignment:

1. The closure report will assist officers in further developing the road safety strategy, which will
support the delivery of Corporate Strategy objectives, especially Priority 4: Making it easier,
greener and safer to travel into and around Bristol.

Template approved October 25
Page 26
OFFICIAL
City Benefits:

1. The Task and Finish Group’s role was to steer the development of a new strategy which will aim to
bring wide ranging benefits for the city. The 33 outcomes in the Outcome Report (Appendix A)
provide this steer (but do not set our or initiate any action in their own right).

Consultation Details:

1. 52 external stakeholder group were invited to contribute to the Task and Finish Group, via a survey
and an in-person meeting. 7 responded to the survey and 6 attended an online meeting and
presented their road safety priorities to the group.
2. Further engagement will be undertaken as part of strategy drafting.

Background Documents:

1. A Safe Systems Approach to Road Safety in Bristol (Bristol’s last road safety strategy)
2. Road Safety Task and Finish Group Terms of Reference

Revenue Cost £0 Source of Revenue
Funding
Capital Cost £0 Source of Capital Funding
One off cost ☐ Ongoing cost ☐ Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving? Choose an
item.
OR Income generation proposal ☐

Professional comments section:

1. Finance Advice:
The purpose of this report is to provide information outlining the key outcomes of the Road Safety
Task and Finish Group. There are no immediate revenue or capital implications identified. Future
financial implications will be clearer once the strategy is presented. At that stage, expectation is for
a costed implementation plan (capital and revenue), funding sources, ongoing revenue
consequences and any savings to be identified and to be aligned to approved budget envelop.

Finance Business Partner: Vivi Sargioti – Finance Business Partner Growth & Regeneration, 5 March
2026

2. Legal Advice: There are no legal issues related to this report or its recommendations.

Legal Team Manager: Dawn Bodill – Specialist Solicitor – Property, Planning and Transport Team –
5 February 2026.

3. Implications on IT: I can see no implications on IT arising from this report.

IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead Enterprise Architect – 6 February 2026

4. HR Advice: There are no HR implications evident.

Template approved October 25
Page 27
OFFICIAL
HR Partner: Celia Williams, HR Business Partner – Growth and Regeneration, 3 February 2026

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal YES

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) NO

Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment NO

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

Template approved October 25
Page 28
OFFICIAL
Appendix A: Road Safety Task and Finish Group
Closure Report
Overview
Sessions:
1. Scene setting, vision, and scope
2. Structure, key principles and approaches.
3. Stakeholder engagement and partnership working
4. Actions: long term objectives and short- and medium-term actions
5. Targets and wrap-up
The discussion and outcomes of each session are highlighted below.

Session 1: Scene setting, vision, and scope
The first session involved detailed discussion of the safe systems approach to road
safety and considered the overall vision and scope of the strategy.
A discussion also resulted in the stakeholder session being moved before the
actions and outcomes session, some additional stakeholders added, and an action
to survey all stakeholders.
Outcome 1: Endorsement of the safe systems approach to road safety
as the foundation of the new strategy
Councillors were provided with a detailed overview of the safe systems to road
safety and agreed that this should be the foundation of the new strategy. However,
the strategy need not try to explain this approach, simply apply it – understanding of
the safe system should not be necessary to understand the strategy.
Outcome 2: Cllrs agreed that the key audiences for the strategy should
be the public, council staff, councillors, and key stakeholders

Outcome 3: Agreement of an outline vision
An outline draft vision for the strategy was developed with Cllrs. The vision of the
strategy should be a future in Bristol where:
- Deaths and serious injuries on Bristol’s roads are eliminated and unacceptable
- Children feel safe to travel independently for local and school journeys, and their
parents and carers feel safe to let them make those journeys themselves,
embedding healthy habits from a young age.
- Everyone feels safe on Bristol’s roads, especially the most vulnerable, whether
that’s due to disability, choice of transport such as walking or cycling, or anything
else.

1
Page 29
- Fairness is embedded in our transport system, and no one is exposed to
increased risk of harm because of their background or where they live. (Noting
that collisions and casualties are significantly and disproportionately higher for
people living in Bristol’s most deprived areas, and that many residents do not
have access to a car, either at all or most of the time).
- Resources (such as funding and road space) are prioritised where possible
towards vehicles that pose the least danger to others and the least harm to the
planet.
(The above includes amendments made following session 1 and agreed in session
2)
Following stakeholder input and during strategy development, the outline will be
expanded upon to create a comprehensive vision that speaks to and is supported by
the key audiences: the public, key stakeholders, council staff and councillors.
Outcome 4: Agreement of a forward-looking approach to road safety
The strategy should look ahead and be flexible to ensure it can guide an appropriate
response to emerging technologies or other changes.
Outcome 5: The strategy should be grounded in data and evidence
Alongside STATS19 collision data, wider datasets and research should be used
where possible to identify where to prioritise actions, and where to target those, to
achieve the objectives of the strategy. Where possible, rate-based casualty and
collision data should be used.
Outcome 6: Cllrs agreed the strategy should focus on the council as a
whole
The strategy will therefore be expected to apply to and include actions for teams
across Highways and City Transport and beyond. All future highways and
development projects should be “safe by design”
Outcome 7: Cllrs agreed the strategy should dedicate some space to
highlighting cross cutting benefits of improved road safety, e.g.
economic growth, impact on wildlife, environment, wider health.

Session 2: Principles and approaches
The second session focussed on the overall structure and the key principles and
approaches that should be central to how Bristol City Council seeks to achieve its
objectives to end deaths and serious injuries on our roads.
A set of proposed principles and approaches, informed by best practice, was
presented to councillors and these were discussed in detail.

2
Page 30
Outcome 8: Cllrs agreed a high-level structure for the strategy, with a
high-level succinct strategy, a more detailed action plan, and a separate
evidence base
The group endorsed an approach of developing:

• A strategy document focused on high-level longer-term objectives, principles,
and approaches, no more than around 30 pages.

This should be drafted with a broad 10-12 year outlook but with a ‘living document’
approach avoiding specific references to projects or individuals that will date the
strategy. Instead, it should outline our overarching priorities, outcomes and
objectives, and guide how we will achieve those.

• A separate action plan, with short- and medium-term actions, which can be
regularly reviewed and updated

This will be informed by the strategy and will have clear dated actions, indicators,
and targets. This will be reviewed regularly (exact timeframes tbc, suggested 2-
yearly) to ensure it reflects changes, such as in technology.

• A separate evidence base, to avoid overloading the strategy with detailed
evidence.
The evidence base should be rigorous, but also not tie our hands for future where
more evidence emerges.

Outcome 9: Cllrs agreed time frames of the strategy should be linked to
other strategies such as the Transport Movement Plan and the Kerbside
Strategy, to ensure these are complementary and mutually reinforcing.
This may not need to be referenced explicitly in a way that could make the strategy
appear out of date quickly. Time frames of action plans, and indicators and targets,
should be set with awareness of political cycles.
Outcome 10: Cllrs agreed that we should adopt a proactive and strategic
approach to road safety, i.e.:
• Actions within the action plan should be clearly linked to longer term outcomes
and objectives, with evidence of how individual actions will help achieve those
outcomes over time.
• This interlinks with being evidence-led: evidence of longer term but more
significant impact should be considered more valuable than short term less
significant impact (all else being equal).
• When identifying actions to achieve an objective, we should be asking ourselves
how we can collaborate with wider council projects to achieve these upstream,
as well as delivering our own part of the solution.
• Priorities should not be informed by ‘knee-jerk’ reactions. Reacting to problems
and evidence (e.g. collision history) would still be critical, but that should be done
so strategically.

3
Page 31
Outcome 11: Cllrs agreed that the strategy should be data- and evidence-
led.
In practice, this would mean that:
• The actions we prioritise in the strategy action plan should be those which are
best evidenced to deliver the objectives we have set out.
• Where projects and programmes are being developed (e.g. a new road safety
campaign or a new engineering programme to improve safe routes to school),
these should be preceded by a review of evidence and best practice to
identify a balanced perspective on which actions will best deliver the desired
outcomes, and where they should be deployed for maximum impact.
• The right data should be used to address the right problem. For example,
public complaints via ‘Improve my street’ about a junction feeling unsafe is
invaluable data/evidence with regards to feeling of safety but may not tell us
the fundamental causes of collisions or provide the detail to review patterns in
these collisions – collision data will be more accurate. Both data sources are
valuable, but which we focus on would depend on what problem we’re trying
to solve.
• Where new and innovative approaches offer potential road safety benefits but
do not have an established evidence base, we should trial these locally before
city-wide rollout, with close monitoring and evaluation of benefits and
disbenefits. For example, the planned trial of implied crossings on North
Street will inform whether we undertake a wider rollout.
• Monitoring and evaluation should be undertaken for all projects to ensure
lessons are learned and embedded. Outcomes should be measured against
the original objectives.
• It’s important to avoid “paralysis by analysis” – data and evidence will only tell
us so much.

Cllrs highlighted that:
- We may need to proactively encourage increased public reports of issues to help
build the evidence base of locations that feel dangerous and to empower
residents with information on how and when to report a road safety concern.
- We should also be clear on the caveats or gaps in data and ensure we do not
make decisions or prioritise actions based on incomplete data, without
accounting for underreporting or other gaps. For example, lack of cycling
collisions may not indicate a location is safe, but that cyclists avoid it because it
is unsafe.
- Where possible, two corroborated data sources should be used
- Communicating evidence and data clearly to the public is important

Outcome 12: Cllrs highlighted that the strategy sits below the corporate
priorities, and the data and evidence must be interpreted accordingly.
For example, we should not discourage cycling or walking because these modes
have higher rates of collisions, given the overarching corporate priorities to increase
cycling and walking.

4
Page 32
Outcome 13: Cllrs supported the use of risk reduction approaches from
other sectors that are more effective at reducing harm than road safety
has been traditionally
Councillors broadly supported some application of the ‘Hierarchy of Risk Control’
(see below) as a means to communicate how the council should prioritise its
overarching response to safety issues.

Hierarchy of controls to road risk

It was suggested that other sector approaches such as ALARP (As Low As
Reasonably Practicable) should also be considered. Officers will consider the most
appropriate approach as part of strategy drafting and stakeholder feedback.
Councillors agreed that approaches such as these could help adopt a mindset
similar to aviation and rail where any injury or fatality is considered unacceptable.
Councillors also felt that we should seek to be involved in any local or regional Road
Safety Investigation Branch.
It was highlighted that guidance may be required on how these would be applied in
practice.
Outcome 14: Cllrs highlighted that there will always be challenges when
balancing against other council priorities, and that wherever possible
solutions that achieve multiple council objectives should be prioritised.

Outcome 15: Cllrs agreed that the hierarchy of road users should also be
referenced in the strategy.

5
Page 33
The hierarchy of road users in the Highway Code states that “those in charge of
vehicles that can cause the greatest harm in the event of a collision bear the greatest
responsibility to take care and reduce the danger they pose to others. This principle
applies most strongly to drivers of large goods and passenger vehicles,
vans/minibuses, cars/taxis and motorcycles.
Cyclists, horse riders and drivers of horse drawn vehicles likewise have a
responsibility to reduce danger to pedestrians. None of this detracts from the
responsibility of ALL road users, including pedestrians, cyclists and horse riders, to
have regard for their own and other road users’ safety.”
Outcome 16: Cllrs requested that the term ‘vulnerable road users’ is
avoided in public facing communications where possible

Outcome 17: Cllrs highlighted that the strategy will need to guide the
challenge of targeting the areas with the highest density of collisions,
without ignoring other areas
Cllrs noted the strong correlation between someone living in an area of greater
deprivation and an increased likelihood of involvement in a collision. The strategy will
need to set out how this will be addressed.
Outcome 18: Cllrs highlighted that the strategy will need to set out how
emerging modes such as micromobility can be made as safe as
possible, for users and others.
National legislation is required to address many aspects of micromobility safety, but
local action may also play a supporting role.
Outcome 19: Cllrs broadly indicated that road safety should carry a
greater weight in decision making than it currently does. However, final
decisions will always sit with senior directors and elected members.

Session 3: Stakeholder Engagement
The third session provided an opportunity for stakeholders to provide their
perspectives to the Task and Finish Group.
52 stakeholders were contacted and provided with a survey and given the
opportunity to speak to the committee. 7 responded by completing the survey, while
6 took the opportunity to speak to the Group.
There was then some discussion amongst councillors, which drew out some key
priorities.
There was also a brief discussion of further stakeholder engagement.

6
Page 34
Outcome 20: Officers to ensure stakeholder input during session 3 is
reflected where possible in the strategy, especially those highlighted by
councillors
Cllrs did not specifically endorse or reject all individual proposals from stakeholders,
but these will be considered in light of the wider approach of the strategy, for
example feeding in as a key piece of evidence.
Outcome 21: The strategy should reflect that pedestrians and cyclists do
not always have the same safety priorities, and while at times these can
align, they can also conflict. LTN1/20 and Active Travel England
guidance should be followed wherever possible.
Cllrs highlighted that we should avoid an approach which suggests a certain action is
always ‘good’ or ‘bad’, but that this depends on context and design. Bus stop
bypasses were given as an example of something which can designed poorly or
well, and this is key to their effectiveness at keeping all users safe.
Outcome 22: Councillors agreed that Bikeability training brings valuable
benefits, and would like to see more children attend training. The
potential to reduce charges for Bikeability Training, especially for
children in receipt of Free School Meals, should be explored.

Outcome 23: Cllrs indicated support for behaviour change
communications campaigns to improve adherence to the Highway Code.

Outcome 24: Cllrs suggested that those driving as part of their role in
Bristol City Council should be held to a particularly high standard of
safety, to set a positive example for others.

Session 4: Actions and outcomes
The fourth session focussed on potential short-, medium-term actions, and long-term
outcomes which Cllrs would like to see in the strategy. This was not to set out a
definitive final action plan, but to provide guidance to officers during strategy drafting.
Cllrs provided feedback and additions to a starting list of potential actions, which was
compiled of suggestions from stakeholders in session 3 and from officers.
The final action plan will also, for example, be dictated by earlier-agreed principles
and approaches (e.g. Outcome 11, being data- and evidence- led)
Before discussion of actions and outcomes, there was a discussion of developing
regional partnership options and how to balance the need to improve safety and
feeling of safety.
Outcome 25: Cllrs support the concept of a regional road safety
partnership, although flagged the importance of ensuring this
appropriately focused on urban road safety alongside rural concerns.

7
Page 35
A city-wide forum or group was discussed, but no decision was taken. The Bristol
Sustainable Transport Network was suggested as a potential ongoing forum that
could contribute, rather than establishing a new body.
Cllrs also highlighted that willingness of all parties to take action as part of a
partnership is key.
Outcome 26: Further work is needed to identify how the strategy
balances a focus on safety (e.g. locations with a known history of
collisions) vs feeling of safety (locations that may feel unsafe but have
no history of collisions).
Broadly, there was a discussion amongst from Cllrs about a tiered approach,
prioritising:
- Locations/roads which are known to pose real risks to safety and feel unsafe,
then
- Locations/roads which are known to pose real risks to safety, but may not feel
unsafe, then
- Locations/roads which do not have evidence of real risks to safety, but do feel
unsafe, then
- Anything else
It was also suggested that perhaps the focus of the road safety team be locations
with known safety risks, while the work of other teams should be to improve safety,
but also that there is a need to address areas that can feel intimidating and unsafe.
It was highlighted that feeling of safety is more important for people walking, cycling,
e-scooting, and on motorcycles. Feeling of safety for drivers may encourage
behaviour that puts others (and themselves) in danger, while reduced feeling of
safety (e.g. by removing centre lines on some roads) may actually reduce collisions
as this will encourage more cautious driving.
How this is balanced in the strategy therefore needs further exploration.
It was highlighted that Improve My Street is a key tool for assessing feeling of safety,
but may not be accessible to all, so other options should be explored.

Outcome 27: The following areas of action were highlighted by Cllrs as
workstreams to consider in the short term:
a. Developing policies that have an overarching impact on safety and can
have a positive impact across council services, but may take some
time to bed in. The centreline policy was provided as an example by
some councillors, other suggestions included ensuring we
automatically narrow all bell-mouth junctions, including via paint, during
other works or maintenance where possible, and ensuring that where
bollards are repeatedly damaged by drivers, other more
comprehensive safety measures should be considered.

8
Page 36
b. Developing a comprehensive behaviour change communications
campaign to improve safe behaviour on Bristol’s roads and address
poor compliance with laws and the Highway Code.
c. Other measures to improve compliance, especially with speed limits.
This should be evidence-led.
d. Improved clarity on who is responsible for what enforcement between
police and local authorities would help the public, for example in the
context of dangerous parking.
e. Cllrs were supportive of workstreams to address dangerous parking
and increased enforcement, and it was agreed that this would continue
to be developed alongside the Kerbside Strategy. For example,
prioritising enforcement of DYLs which have been installed specifically
for safety, e.g. at junctions. This was reiterated in Session 5.
f. Councillors supported exploring the potential to use speed limiters in
council vehicles.
g. Councillors highlighted the importance of working with professional
drivers, especially licenced taxis, bus drivers, and other fleets such as
HGVs and deliveries.

Outcome 28: The following areas of action were highlighted by Cllrs as
workstreams to consider in the medium term:
a. Ensuring safety lessons from the micromobility trial are fed back to the
DfT in advance of a final permanent scheme. A workstream is needed
to consider appropriate action to improve safety of these vehicles,
while being conscious of the relatively low impact they have compared
to motor vehicles in terms of collisions.
b. Further development of behaviour change programme suggested in
short-term.
c. Increasing uptake of bikeability
d. Appropriateness of 40mph+ speed limits across the city should be
considered, but as these are limited, it may not need a comprehensive
review.
e. An escalating approach to speed enforcement to address persistent
non-compliance, making use of education, signage and lines, targeted
enforcement, speed cameras, community speed watch, and other
interventions or traffic calming where all other interventions have failed.
Cllrs expressed support for average speed cameras but acknowledged
these are not currently practical in urban areas due to the number and
frequency of junctions.

Outcome 29: The following areas of action were highlighted by Cllrs as
workstreams to consider in the long term:
a. Exploring gender budgeting and how this could be applied
b. Workstream to ensure any safety benefits of autonomous vehicles are
maximised, and risks minimised

9
Page 37
Session 5: Targets and wrap-up
During this session, a number of earlier discussion points included above were
revisited and finalised. Councillors received briefings on the National Road Safety
Strategy (published between sessions 4 and 5) and the Healthy Streets approach,
and also discussed targets.
Outcome 30: Alongside the overall vision zero ambition, the strategy
should set ambitious targets and/or indicators against which progress
should be measured.
A final decision was not made on whether a specific dated target to achieve vision
zero should be set, following a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of
such a target. It was noted that there are now a range of different relevant set targets
to achieve vision zero, including a Full Council Golder Motion (by 2030), West of
England Combined Authority JLTP (by 2036), One City Plan (targets removed, but
formerly by 2042), and the UK Government Target of 65% reduction in KSIs and
70% reduction in child KSIs by 2036 – see table below.
Discussion highlighted that an additional target may not be helpful, but incremental
indicators are critical.
It was broadly agreed that targets should be pragmatic but ambitious, and shorter-
and medium-term indicators (related to specific outcomes or actions, and/or as an
indicator of progress towards achieving vision zero) are more important, with vision
zero being the overall objective and ‘way of thinking’.

10
Page 38
Comparison of KSIs to each KSI target and National
Target if adopted
180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0 2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030
2031
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
2040
2041
Actual KSIs One City Plan (2041)
JLTP4 (2035) Full Council 2023 (2030)
National Strategy (2026-2035) Linear (Actual KSIs)

Outcome 31: Councillors highlighted that there should be closer
collaboration with Transport Development Management and Planning to
ensure that wherever possible new developments include high
standards of road safety which are embedded early in design.

Outcome 32: Councillors highlighted that case studies highlighting how
the principles in the strategy would be applied would be helpful to
support public understanding of their application in practice.

Outcome 33: Councillors suggested that securing detailed stakeholder or
expert professional input to provide a perspective from disabled road
users would be valuable.

11
Page 39
Equality Impact Assessment [version 3.1]

Title: Road Safety Task and Finish Group Outcomes Report
Type of proposal: Other Status: New
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Mark Sperduty
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Group Manager – Road Safety

Step 1: What do we want to do?

What is the purpose of the proposal?
This Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) is to accompany the Outcomes Report from the Road Safety Task
and Finish Group that is going to the Transport and Connectivity Committee on 19th March 2026.

Purpose of Report:
1. To provide information outlining the key outcomes of the Road Safety Task and Finish Group.

The Task and Finish Group’s role was to help steer the development of a new road safety strategy. This
input will be used alongside stakeholder feedback and technical input to develop a strategy, which will
then return to committee with its own EqIA.

Who will be affected?
☐ Bristol City Council workforce ☐ Service users ☐ The wider community
☐ Commissioned services ☐ City partners / Stakeholder organisations

Will the proposal have an equality impact?
☐ Yes ☒ No
If ‘Yes’ complete steps 2-4 below. If ‘No’ explain how you know there will be no equality impact:
We do not believe there to be any equalities impact of this proposal. This proposal is for committee
members to note the Outcomes Report from the Road Safety Task and Finish Group only. This is a non-
key decision, and while it will influence the development of a new strategy, there are no specific actions
or decisions arising that will affect how people access or participate in a service, or change aspects like
health, education, or quality of life. Should any of the proposals in the outcomes report develop into
new workstreams, these will be subject to their own individual EqIAs.

Step 5: Review
Equality and Inclusion Team Review Director Sign-Off: Alex Hearn
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

Date: 19/02/2026 Date: 23/02/2026

Page 40
OFFICIAL
Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.

Page 41
OFFICIAL
Agenda Item 8

Committee Report

KEY DECISION OR FOR INFORMATION: Key decision affects 2 or more wards

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 19 March 2026

TITLE: 20mph Review

Ward(s): Citywide

Officer presenting the report: Adam Crowther Job title: City Transport – Head of Service

Committee Chair: Cllr Ed Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: Committee Chair

Purpose of Report:
1. To update Committee on the 20mph Review, including an evidence review and
technical assessment. The review of evidence and best practice can be found at
Appendix A. This informed a technical road-by-road assessment of all 30mph roads in
Bristol, which identified 97 roads which would benefit from safer 20mph speed limits.
Details also in Appendix A.

2. To seek approval to launch a six-week public engagement on the outcomes of that
technical assessment. This will invite public and further stakeholder and councillor input
on the proposals to introduce a 20mph speed limit on 97 roads identified in the technical
assessment. Councillors will be able to raise road-by-road feedback or concerns as
part of this public engagement.

3. To seek authorisation for the Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration, in
consultation with the Chair of Transport and Connectivity Committee, to consider the
outcomes of the public engagement and, informed by this, decide which of the
proposals should or should not proceed to the statutory Traffic Regulation Order (TRO)
process. The TRO process includes statutory consultation, which will provide a further
opportunity for councillors and others to raise any individual concerns or objections to
proposals. These will be considered carefully to identify any final changes needed
before the project moves to delivery.

Evidence Base

1. The objectives of the 20mph review are to:
a. support progress towards the Full Council commitment (adopted 11/09/23) to “vision
zero”, ending deaths and serious injuries on our roads, improving safety for all
b. improve the feeling of safety on Bristol’s roads to enable more walking and cycling,
improve air quality, and reduce emissions.

Template approved October 25
Page 42
OFFICIAL
2. A detailed evidence review has been undertaken, which can be found (with full
references) in Appendix A. The headline findings are that:

a. 20mph on residential roads is broadly and persistently supported by the public,
especially in their local area. Lower support is usually from drivers who live outside
of the area (UK Parliamentary Office for Science and Technology, 2025).
b. 20mph is the maximum safe operating speed on British roads where pedestrians,
cyclists, and motorcyclists mix with cars and vans (Road Safety Foundation, 2025).
c. If a driver makes an emergency stop at 20mph, they will have reached a full stop
after 10m, about 2.5 car lengths. If driving at 30mph, they would still be going 28mph
after 10m, and a collision with a pedestrian would bring a high chance of a fatality
(RAC, 2024).
d. 20mph limits are effective at encouraging safer speeds, with an average reduction of
1-5mph depending on scheme (UK Parliamentary Office for Science and
Technology, 2025). These small reductions have significant safety benefits: every
1mph above 20mph increases the chance of a pedestrian fatality in a collision by
15% (Hussain et al., 2019).

e. Similar schemes have reduced casualties by between 11% and 39% (Parliamentary
Advisory Council for Transport Safety, 2023), with a 21% lower chance of injury for
people cycling (Aldred et al., 2018), and a 20% drop in damage-only collisions
(Esure, 2024).

f. The roads recommended for 20mph (Appendix A) have a total length of 59 miles,
which is 5% of Bristol’s highways network, but 30% of Bristol’s serious and fatal
casualties occur on these roads, and 27% of all casualties. A wide range of factors
influence the likelihood of collisions, but if the changes achieved a 20% reduction in
casualties, this would represent an average reduction of 46 slight and 7 serious or
fatal casualties each year (5% of the annual average).

g. 20mph limits do not significantly impact most urban car or bus journey times
(Atkins/AECOM/UCL; DfT 20mph Research Study, 2018). Journey time reliability
may improve (Transport for Wales, 2025).

h. First Bus reported that the original 20mph South Bristol pilot, which included some
major bus corridors, did not adversely affect bus journey times or service reliability
(BCC 20mph Monitoring Report, 2012).

i. Primary school-age children cannot reliably judge vehicle speeds above 25mph
(Wann et al., 2011).

j. The greatest safety benefit of 20mph limits is on busier / faster residential ‘main’
roads as opposed to already-quieter residential side roads (Parliamentary Advisory
Council for Transport Safety, 2023). This is particularly relevant for Bristol as many
of these roads are key cycling and walking corridors but were omitted from the
original rollout and have no other significant safety improvements planned or
budgeted for.
Template approved October 25
Page 43
OFFICIAL
k. Additional benefits include improved feeling of safety and increased walking and
cycling, improved air quality due to reduced emissions (~18%), reduced fuel costs
for drivers (~7%), and potentially reduced insurance premiums (~10%) for drivers
(full references in Appendix A).

l. Overall, 20mph limits are therefore a highly impactful and cost-effective road safety
intervention and a critical step in achieving Bristol’s commitment to ending deaths
and serious injuries on our roads.
Alternative options considered:

1. With the budget available there is no other action which could effectively improve safety
at this scale across existing 30mph roads in Bristol. Targeted improvements to address
collision cluster sites (which will be ongoing separately as part of wider casualty
reduction work) can address only a small fraction of issues and would have limited
impact on overall feeling of safety, which is often persistent along the length of roads
and requires costly engineering interventions.

2. The alternative option is therefore taking no further action or considering only a small
number of roads for 20mph, which would undermine the Council’s ability to progress
towards Full Council commitments to ending deaths and serious injuries on our roads.
While safe speeds are only one part of the solution, they are critically important and one
of the few areas of road safety where local authorities have significant influence and
control.

Officer Recommendations:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:

1. Notes the outcomes of the review of evidence and best practice and the technical road-
by-road assessment outlined in Appendix A.

2. Approves launching a six-week public engagement on the outcomes of that technical
assessment.

3. Authorises the Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration, in consultation with the
Chair of Transport and Connectivity Committee, to consider the outcomes of the public
engagement and, informed by this, make a delegated decision on which of the
proposals should or should not proceed to the statutory Traffic Regulation Order (TRO)
process, which includes further statutory consultation.

Corporate Strategy alignment:
1) Improving safety on our roads aligns closely with Corporate Strategy Priority 4: Making it
easier, greener and safer to travel into and around Bristol. It also supports objectives under
priorities 2, 3, and 5, namely addressing health inequality, improving safety in public
spaces, and supporting a shift to sustainable transport and therefore reducing carbon
emissions.

2) The Road Safety Task and Finish Group has been steering the development of a new road
safety strategy. The Outcomes Report from that Group is also being presented to this
Template approved October 25
Page 44
OFFICIAL
Committee. Although that strategy is still being drafted, the 20mph Review is being carried
out in close alignment with the approaches to road safety endorsed by the Task and Finish
Group and set out in the Outcomes Report, for example commitments to:

a) a “safe systems” approach (of which safe speeds are a key component),
b) increase our level of action and ambition to achieve an end to deaths and serious
injuries and take steps to improve the feeling of safety when using our roads
c) a strategic, proactive, and data- and evidence-led approach

City Benefits:

1. The latest road traffic casualty data indicates that Bristol is failing to make sufficient
progress towards its commitments to ending deaths and serious injuries on our roads,
with a 22% increase in people killed and seriously injured in 2024 compared with 2023.
The estimated societal financial cost of these collisions is £90m, and there is also a
significant impact on the uptake of walking and cycling due to a feeling that these are
not safe ways to travel.

2. Building on the success of Bristol’s 2010-14 20mph rollout offers a significant
opportunity to improve safety and feeling of safety citywide. The original rollout was
estimated to have saved between 4-5 lives and prevented 11 serious injuries every
year, while boosting active travel by 20%. This broadly aligns with the comprehensive
evidence of the positive impacts of 20mph from locations across the UK and beyond,
set out in the evidence review in Appendix A.

3. 86% of Bristol’s roads are currently 20mph, but growing evidence has highlighted the
importance of reducing residential “main” roads to 20mph to maximise the road safety
benefit. Many of these roads form key strategic corridors but are generally slow moving
due to congestion, especially during day-time hours. The current 30mph speed limit
encourages short periods of acceleration then deceleration between traffic lights,
without necessarily improving traffic flow or overall journey times. A safer 20mph speed
limit therefore has the advantage of improving safety and feeling of safety without
significantly impacting journey times.

4. The evidence suggests that 20mph limits are likely to result in an overall improvement
in air quality due to a smoothing of driving style, with less rapid acceleration and
deceleration. More detail is found in the Environmental Impact Assessment (Appendix
C).

5. Road danger has a disproportionate impact on people living in areas with higher levels
deprivation, with a strong correlation across all transport modes between deprivation
and the likelihood of being involved in a collision. Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic
people, young people, and men are also disproportionately likely to be involved in a
collision, regardless of deprivation. Pregnant people face a greater risk of serious injury
in the event of a collision. Improving safety for all will therefore have a
disproportionately positive impact on these groups, helping to address inequality (full
Equality Impact Assessment at Appendix B).

6. Concerns related to 20mph generally relate to potential impacts on journey times for
cars and buses. The impact speed limits have on journey times is highly dependent on
the road in question and time of journey, but in busy urban areas such as Bristol,
journey times are primarily influenced by congestion and junctions. 20mph does not
Template approved October 25
Page 45
OFFICIAL
increase congestion and does not impact how many cars can pass through a green light
phase from stationary. Impact on journey times is therefore likely to be zero or
negligible. More detail can be found in the evidence base in Appendix A.

7. Compliance with some speed limits is an ongoing challenge. Average day-time speeds
on all roads under consideration is below 24mph, which DfT Guidance indicates should
lead to general good compliance. Police are responsible for enforcement, and we will
engage closely with police as part of wider Partnership working to maximise the safety
impact of targeted enforcement. Given the importance of compliance, the 20mph
Review is being accompanied by a public communications campaign to support
compliance with 20mph, with behaviour change interventions planned as part of
delivery. A longer running strategic city-wide approach to improving compliance with
speed limits will be considered as part of the upcoming road safety strategy.

8. Overall, the recommendations, if implemented, would have a positive impact on road
safety through the city, as well as a positive impact on feeling of safety and on
improvement to air quality.

Consultation Details:

1. Key stakeholders (Internal teams, all Councillors, members of the Road Safety Task and
Finish Group, Avon and Somerset Police, First Bus, Stagecoach, the West of England
Combined Authority, One City Board, and neighbouring Local Authorities where relevant)
have been engaged for early input. Their feedback and officer responses and actions
taken are set out in Appendix F.

2. Bus operators were approached early, with a request for evidence or data to help identify
whether any individual proposals may have a significant impact on any services or
journey times. Bus operators highlighted general concerns about impacts on bus times,
especially on the strategic network, but did not provide any specific evidence or data to
support this. 20mph limits are generally evidenced to have zero or negligible impacts on
urban journey times, and overall the evidence we have available does not suggest that
safe 20mph limits on strategic corridors and a well-patronised and efficient bus network
are mutually exclusive aims.

3. First Bus raised an objection to the original Traffic Regulation Order for the initial 20mph
rollout, which they withdrew subject to extensive monitoring being carried out in the pilot
area, which they led. First Bus reported based on their monitoring that the pilot did not
adversely affect bus journey times or reliability, and they did not raise any further
objections or concerns relating to the rollout, which included some major bus corridors.

4. Some of Bristol’s strategic bus corridors (e.g. Gloucester Road) are already 20mph, and
average speeds are often well below 20mph on some existing 30mph corridors. There
may be a greater impact on some services which operate at particularly quiet periods,
e.g. at night or early on weekend mornings, but we do not expect most journeys to be
impacted significantly.

5. Many key bus corridors are also key corridors for walking and cycling. Limited roads
capacity on these roads has generally been prioritised for bus lanes as opposed to wider
pavements, protected cycle lanes, or other measures to improve the safety of walking
and cycling. This leaves 20mph as the remaining option to significantly improve safety
and feeling of safety on these routes. The Road Safety Team, Public Transport Team,
Template approved October 25
Page 46
OFFICIAL
and Transport Policy team therefore feel that the current recommendations strike the right
balance between improving safety and supporting public transport.

6. Ward councillors have been engaged through the process, initially by proposing priority
roads for 20mph, and then providing feedback on the outcomes of the technical
assessment (see Appendix F for details). On a small number of roads identified as having
a borderline case for 20mph, relevant local councillors were asked again to input on how
these should be presented in the consultation. Councillors will be able to provide further
road-by-road feedback as part of the upcoming engagement phase, which will be
carefully considered as part of final decisions on which proposals to progress to TRO.
They will have a final opportunity to object to proposals as part of the statutory TRO
process.

7. Other key stakeholders have indicated support for the proposals as a whole, with some
individual feedback relating to specific roads (see Appendix F for more details). Full public
consultation will follow this report (if approved by Committee), which will also provide an
opportunity for other stakeholders to respond.
Background Documents:

1. Setting local speed limits - GOV.UK
2. Bristol Road Casualty Review 2023
3. Adopted Full Council Vision Zero Golden Motion (with amendments) 11 July 2023

Revenue £ Source of Revenue
Cost Funding
Capital Cost £500,000 Source of Capital Clean Air Zone Fund
Funding
One off cost ☒ Ongoing Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving?
cost ☐ Choose an item.
OR Income generation proposal ☐

Professional comments section:

1. Finance Advice:
This report seeks approval from the Transport & Connectivity Committee to move to the
public consultation phase to reduce the speed limit to 20mph on 97 currently 30mph roads
(and a further set of connected cul-de-sacs) across Bristol.

This is a one-off capital cost associated with implementing the proposed 20mph speed limit.
The proposal is this to be funded through the Clean Air Zone Fund, ensuring alignment with
broader environmental and air quality objectives. No ongoing revenue costs have been
identified in the report and if any should be covered by the existing maintenance budgets of
the service. No savings or income generation are anticipated.

Finance Business Partner: Vivi Sargioti – Finance Business Partner Growth &
Regeneration, 13 January 2026

2. Legal Advice: The Council as Highway Authority has the power to make Traffic Regulation
Order’s (TRO’s) in relation to speed limits by virtue of s84 of the Traffic Regulation Act 1984.
TRO’s must be subject to consultation for the minimum statutory period prescribed by the
Template approved October 25
Page 47
OFFICIAL
Act. Consultation should take place at a formative stage in the process when the proposals
are still capable of being amended in response to the consultation feedback. Sufficient
reasons must be given for the proposals so that the consultee has a clear understanding of
the scheme and that allows adequate time to consider the proposals and allow a response.
All consultation responses must be made available to the decision maker and must be taken
into account by the decision maker prior to the decision being made.
Legal Team Manager: Joanne Mansfield 30 December 2025

3. Implications on IT: I can see no implications on IT arising from this report.

IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead Enterprise Architect – 6 January 2026

4. HR Advice: There are no HR implications evident

HR Partner: Celia Williams, HR Business Partner, 23 December 2025

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal YES

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) YES

Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment YES

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external YES

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

Template approved October 25
Page 48
OFFICIAL
20mph review: Appendix A – further information and evidence
review
1. Details of road-by-road technical assessment
Following a road-by-road assessment of all 30mph roads in Bristol, 97
roads/sections of road are proposed for 20mph for public engagement. Cul-de-sacs
and short road ends were not individually assessed and are not included in these 97
roads – their speed limit will be set by the main/larger road they are connected to.
The assessment considered the following criteria as indicators in support of 20mph,
which informed the final professional recommendation by road safety officers:

• Residential streets, high streets, and streets with secondary shopping
frontages
• Streets with high numbers of dense workplaces
• Proximity of public transport hubs
• Mixed use with people walking, wheeling, cycling, e-scooting, and
motorcycling, which are sustainable modes (with the exception of
motorcycling) but also most impacted by road danger
• Collision history
• Public input via the Improve My Street tool, communications with councillors,
and other earlier engagement
• Proximity to and routes to/from schools and other major trip generators
• Consistency, to ensure similar streets have similar speed limits
The proposals are set out in maps and a table in section 3 below.

2. Evidence Review
The original 20mph rollout was informed by wide ranging evidence of the benefits of
20mph, and this body of evidence has expanded in the past 10 years, with the rollout
of new schemes (including Bristol’s) enabling further research.
The key objectives of the 20mph review are:

• Reduced collisions and reduced severity of collisions, improving safety for all
• Improved feeling of safety and a calmer environment on our roads to enable
more walking and cycling, reduce car-dependence, and in turn improve air
quality and reduce emissions.
Bristol City Council is committed to “vision zero”: ending road deaths and serious
injuries on our roads.1
The evidence review has focussed where possible on comprehensive reports by
authoritative publishers (Government and leading road safety consultants and
bodies) and peer-reviewed academic meta-analysis. These represent the highest

Page 49
OFFICIAL
quality evidence available as they consider a wide range of local studies to reach
widely applicable conclusions, as opposed to giving undue weight to outcomes from
individual schemes, which may be less applicable in a different environment.

Headline findings:
• 20mph is the maximum safe speed on most of Bristol’s roads, and 20mph limits
are a highly impactful and cost-effective road safety intervention and a critical
step in achieving Bristol’s commitment to ending deaths and serious injuries on
our roads.
• The greatest safety benefit of 20mph limits is on busier / faster residential ‘main’
roads as opposed to already-quieter residential side roads. This is particularly
relevant for Bristol as many of these roads are key cycling and walking routes
but were omitted from the original rollout and have no other significant safety
improvements planned or budgeted for.
• 20mph on residential roads is broadly and persistently supported by the public
and has no significant impact on most urban car or bus journey times. Journey
time reliability generally improves.
• Additional benefits include increased walking and cycling, improved air quality,
reduced emissions, and reduced insurance premiums and fuel costs for drivers.

In more detail:
1. The public are supportive of 20mph on residential roads (most recent DfT
England-wide survey found 71% supportive vs 14% opposed)2 and support
generally grows after introduction. Those least likely to be supportive are
drivers who live outside the area.3
2. 20mph is the maximum safe operating speed on British roads where
pedestrians, cyclists, and motorcyclists mix with cars. This drops to
10mph where there is a particular prevalence of pedestrians, cyclists, and
motorcyclists or heightened vulnerability, such as around schools or
hospitals.4 (10mph speed limits are not being considered as part of this
review).
3. 20mph limits are effective at reducing speeds and have the greatest
safety impact on faster roads such as residential ‘main’ roads as
opposed to side roads. Where existing average speeds are under 24mph,
evidence suggest 1-2mph reduction, rising to 5mph where existing speeds are
above 24mph.5
4. Primary school-age children cannot reliably judge vehicle speeds above
25mph.6
5. A small reduction of speed has a significant impact – reducing speed is
a success even if full 20mph compliance is not achieved. In a collision
with a pedestrian, every 1mph above 20mph increases the chance of a fatality

Page 50
OFFICIAL
by 15%. At 20mph, 6.6% of such collisions are fatal, at 25mph this almost
doubles to 12.9%, then doubles again at 30mph to 25%.7
6. 20mph limits are effective at reducing casualties (impact varies by
scheme, but meta-analysis has found between 11% and 39% reductions in
casualties, and a 21% lower chance of injury for cycling).8 The introduction of
20mph in urban areas in Wales has contributed to a 25% reduction in total
casualties after 18 months, while casualties in England have remained
stagnant.9
7. The roads currently recommended for 20mph have a total length of 59
miles, which is 5% of Bristol’s highways network, but 30% of Bristol’s
serious and fatal casualties occur on these roads (and 27% of all
casualties). If the changes achieved a 20% reduction in casualties, this would
represent an average reduction of 46 slight and 7 serious or fatal casualties
each year (5% of the annual average).10
8. 20mph is effective at reducing non-injury collisions and can lower car
insurance premiums by 10%. Major insurer Esure reported a 20% reduction
in damage claims following 20mph rollout in Wales and has reduced annual
premiums by an average of 10% / £45 accordingly. Work is underway in the
industry to ensure premiums reflect local speed limits in England.11
9. Achieving an end to deaths and serious injuries is multi-faceted, but
speed is the factor that Local Authorities “can control most effectively over
the largest area in a short time at modest cost…compared to what we
conventionally spend on highways”.12
10. Stopping distance is halved at 20mph vs 30mph, from 23m to 12m.13
11. 20mph limits do not have a significant impact on most urban car or bus
journey times and can improve reliability – journey time is primarily
dictated by congestion and junctions. The average length of road under
consideration is 0.6 miles, with an estimated journey impact time of between
2-6 seconds over this distance14, which is compensated by an average 75%
improvement in journey reliability.15
12. First Bus reported that the original 20mph pilot in Bristol did not
adversely affect bus journey times or reliability. First Bus had initially
objected to the proposals on some major routes, but following monitoring of
impacts of the pilot which found no negative impacts, these were withdrawn.16
13. Comprehensive and consistent schemes are most effective in terms of
compliance and outcomes – regular changes between 20mph and 30mph
undermine impact. Fostering driver understanding and culture that roads with
residential frontages are consistently 20mph supports city-wide compliance.17
14. 20mph limits have knock-on safety benefits on nearby roads: introducing
20mph on a residential ‘main’ road can improve compliance on existing
20mph roads nearby.18
15. 49% of people in Bristol say they would walk more, and 52% say they
would cycle more, if more streets were 20mph.19 Perception of safety is the

Page 51
OFFICIAL
key barrier to cycling – only 39% of people in Bristol think it’s safe to cycle in
their local area, while 78% think it’s safe to drive.20 20mph is proven to
increase cycling safety and perception of safety.21 It is not generally possible
to identify a % change in walking and cycling rates post-20mph speed limit
implementation as this cannot be isolated amongst wider behaviour change,
engineering interventions, and other factors.
16. 20mph can reduce emissions and improve air quality, with more
consistent ‘cruising’ and less stop/start driving22 – with an 18% average
reduction in emissions and a 7% reduction in fuel use.23 Modelling accounting
for stop/start urban traffic suggests up to a 35-38% reduction in emission
depending on the nature of the scheme. A driver needs to travel continuously
at 30mph for 1km before it becomes more efficient than at 20mph.24 Guidance
recommends 20mph limits as a tool to improve air quality.25
17. 20mph can result in small (~2.5dB) reductions in noise pollution.26

3. Roads proposed for 20mph for public engagement
Five maps below show which roads are being proposed for 20mph and which are
being proposed to retain 30mph. A full table of proposals is included below this,
which shows the total collisions per km (2020 – 2024) for each section of road.
If approved to proceed to public consultation, these proposals will be split into local
areas and shared with the public via localised maps, with information about how the
outcome of the technical assessment was reached for each road, to inform
feedback.

Page 52
OFFICIAL
Map 1: Northwest

Page 53

Notes for Map 1:
A separate project is
exploring wider safety
interventions, including
20mph speed limits, on Long
Cross / Kings Weston Ave.
This will be consulted on
separately in due course

OFFICIAL
Map 2: North

Page 54

Notes for Map 2:
A separate project is
exploring wider safety
interventions, including
20mph speed limits, on Long
Cross. This will be consulted
on separately in due course

OFFICIAL
Map 3: East

Notes for Map 3:

Page 55
There was a recent
consultation regarding
proposed 20mph limits on
Fishponds Road (marked as
“Already planned change to
20mph”). The outcome of
this consultation is not yet
finalised and will be shared
separately in due course. It
does not form part of the
20mph Review.

OFFICIAL
Map 4: Central

Page 56

Notes for Map 4:
The roads marked as ‘Already planned change for 20mph” around Bedminster Bridges have already been approved for 20mph
speed limits as part of the Bedminster Bridges project. The section on Redcliffe Hill will be dependent on wider works as part of
OFFICIAL that project.
Map 5: South

Page 57

Notes for Map 5:
A separate project is exploring wider safety interventions, including 20mph speed limits, on Hawkfield Road.

OFFICIAL
Table
A full table of all roads proposed for 20mph is set out, which shows the total
collisions per km (2020 – 2024) for each section of road.
The “weighted collisions per km” figure is based on a weighting of 5 per fatal or
serious injury collision, and 1 per slight injury collision, reflecting Bristol City
Council’s priority road safety objective of ending serious and fatal collisions.
The average speed figure is based on connected vehicle data and represents the
average daytime (8am – 8pm) speed over the length of the section. Average speeds
below 20mph indicate that impacts of any new limits on journey times are likely to be
small or zero for most daytime journeys, but will improve safety by reducing top
speeds between junctions and traffic lights. 88% of roads proposed for 20mph have
average speeds below 20mph, and 99% have average speeds below 24mph.
As set out above (section 1), a range of criteria was used to inform the road-by-road
assessment and technical decision on which roads are proposed for 20mph. The
data below is primarily included to highlight roads which are particularly dangerous
based on collision history, and to address any concerns about impacts on journey
times. Some roads may have no history of collisions but a strong case for 20mph
due to other factors, such as being residential or on a route to school.
With the exception of two roundabouts (96 and 97), roads are listed in order of
highest rate of weighted collisions.

Road Length Total Weighted Average speeds
of collisions/ collisions/ (mph, 08:00 –
section km (2020- km (2020- 20:00)
propose 24) 24) (Fatal/
d for Serious = 5,
20mph Slight = 1)
(km)
1. Bond St (E/W) 0.3 90.1 177.09 10.0mph

2. Broad Walk 0.2 62.1 111.85 11.6mph

3. Temple Gate 0.3 55.9 105.63 9.5mph
(Friary to Bath
Bridges)
4. Bond St S 0.2 74.6 99.42 11.0mph
(N/S)
5. Old Market St 0.5 70.4 86.99 8.9mph
/ West St (Old
Market 1)

Page 58
OFFICIAL
6. Church Rd / 0.8 52.2 67.11 10.6mph
Lawrence Hill
(A420)
7. Wells Rd A37 2.3 29.7 56.37 11.1mph
(Three Lamps
to Airport Rd)
8. Trinity Rd 0.2 24.9 49.71 8.6mph
(Old Market 3)
9. Westbury Rd / 0.8 28.6 48.47 16.8mph
Falcondale
Rd South
(A4018)
(Downs Rd to
Spire Bristol
Hospital)
10. Winterstoke 0.5 22.8 47.64 15.6mph
Rd part 2
(Ashton
Works to
Bedminster
Down Rd)
11. Lamb St, 0.5 29.0 45.57 15.0mph
Lawford St,
Lawfords
Gate (A420,
Old Market 2)
12. Hartcliffe Way 0.5 26.9 43.50 11.1mph
A3029 /
Parson St
(30mph
section) part 1
13. King Georges 0.5 22.8 39.35 15.5mph
Rd
14. Wells Rd A37 0.5 12.4 37.28 14.4mph
Part 3 (Border
with BANES
(Whitchurch)
to Whitecross
Ave)
15. Callington Rd 0.3 12.4 37.28 13.6mph
(West Town
Lane to 90
Callington Rd)
16. Filton Rd / 1.4 27.6 35.90 11.1mph
Gloucester Rd
17. Bath Rd A4 1.6 23.0 35.42 13.4mph
Part 2 (West
Town Ln to
Sandy Park
Rd)

Page 59
OFFICIAL
18. A420 (Clouds 2.1 20.1 31.55 11.7mph
Hill Rd / Bell
Hill Rd / Two
Mile Hill Rd)
19. Bath Rd A4 1.8 14.7 28.24 12.1mph
Part 1 (Sandy
Park Rd to
Bath Bridges
Roundabout)
20. Netham Rd / 0.3 15.5 27.96 17.0mph
Fireclay Rd
21. Filton Ave 1.4 13.8 27.62 11.6mph
22. West Town Ln 1.4 15.9 26.93 11.0mph
23. Bishport Ave / 2.6 9.3 24.85 20.0mph
Broad Oak Rd
24. Queen’s Rd / 1.4 13.1 24.16 14.5mph
Grange Rd
25. Kellaway Ave 1.1 16.9 23.97 13.2mph
26. Airport Rd 0.6 17.1 23.30 16.6mph
(Wells Rd to
Cadogan Rd)
27. Feeder Rd / 2.1 15.3 22.94 12.0mph
Cattle Market
Rd
28. Muller Rd 2.9 18.3 22.44 10.4mph
B4469
29. Hallen Rd 0.6 9.3 21.75 22.8mph
(Avonmouth
Way to
SGLOS
border)
30. Southmead 0.3 9.3 21.75 12.4mph
Rd (N)
31. Wellington Hill 1.1 14.2 21.30 17.8mph
West
32. Southmead 1.1 13.3 20.42 11.9mph
Rd / Henleaze
Rd
33. A431 2.1 14.3 20.08 15.8mph
(Summerhill
Rd / Air
Balloon Rd /
Nags Head
Hill / Bryants
Hill)
34. B4469 1.0 19.7 19.68 10.5mph
(Royate Hill /
Rose Green

Page 60
OFFICIAL
Rd / Gordon
Rd)
35. Knole Lane / 1.1 12.4 19.53 20.7mph
Charlton Rd
36. Clifton Down 0.5 10.4 18.64 21.0mph
(30mph
section)
37. A4 Centre 1.8 14.1 18.64 13.7mph
(Hotwell Rd /
Anchor Rd /
Merchants Rd
/ Humphry
Davy Way) &
Lower Lamb
St and Lime
Kiln Rd
38. Shirehampton 1.4 9.7 17.95 16.7mph
Rd B4054 (E),
(Kings
Weston Rd to
Cedar Park)
39. Kings Head 1.0 7.2 15.53 18.4mph
Ln
40. Bedminster 0.3 21.7 18.64 16.0mph
Rd (A38
30mph
section)
41. Parrys Ln 0.8 5.0 14.91 21.7mph
(Cross Elms
Ln to Cote
Paddock)
42. Allison Rd 0.6 7.8 13.98 17.8mph
43. Staple Hill Rd 1.3 7.8 13.98 16.0mph
44. Coronation 2.1 8.1 13.86 14.0mph
Rd / Clift
House Rd
45. Whitehall Rd / 2.1 9.6 13.38 15.3mph
Speedwell Rd
/ Ingleside Rd
46. Whitchurch Ln 1.4 7.6 13.12 16.9mph
47. Avonmouth 1.1 5.3 12.43 11.7mph
Way
48. Henbury Rd 1.1 5.3 12.43 16.1mph
49. Bamfield 0.1 12.4 12.43 13.4mph
(Paddock
Garden to
Whitchurch
Lane)

Page 61
OFFICIAL
50. St John's 0.2 12.4 12.43 11.7mph
Lane (30mph
section)
51. Westbury Rd / 1.3 9.3 12.43 15.2mph
Falcondale
Rd North
(A4018)
(Falcondale
Walk to
Downs Rd)
52. Church Rd / 1.9 9.8 11.91 18.7mph
Bishopsworth
Rd
53. Penpark Rd 1.1 11.5 11.54 15.7mph
54. Stapleton Rd / 0.8 11.2 11.18 17.3mph
Bell Hill
55. A4176 (Upper 0.6 10.9 10.87 15.2mph
Belgrave Rd)
56. Greystoke 1.8 8.5 10.73 17.0mph
Ave (Passage
Rd to Park
Pen Rd)
57. Broomhill Rd 1.0 10.4 10.36 18.6mph
58. Sturminster 2.4 6.2 9.53 21.8mph
Rd / Craydon
Rd /
Stockwood
Rd
59. Frenchay 0.3 9.3 9.32 12.7mph
Park Rd /
B4058 (1 –
Sheldrake Dr
to Begbrook
Ln)
60. Hareclive Rd 0.6 7.8 7.77 15.6mph
(Bishport Ave
to Gatehouse
Ave)
61. Avon St / 1.8 4.5 6.78 13.2mph
Albert Rd
62. Cumberland 2.1 4.3 6.21 18.4mph
Rd
63. Sylvan Way, 2.7 3.3 6.21 18.2mph
Dingle Rd,
Canford Ln,
Canford Rd -
A4162

Page 62
OFFICIAL
64. Bedminster 0.6 17.1 3.11 16.5mph
Down Rd
(A38)
65. Kings Weston 0.3 6.2 6.21 19.9mph
Rd (Hallen Rd
to Woodgrove
Ln)
66. St Anne's Rd 0.6 6.2 6.21 16.6mph
(incl. Wyatts
View)
67. Broomhill Rd / 1.1 5.3 5.45 14.7mph
Emery Rd
68. Stoke Hill / 2.1 5.3 5.26 17.8mph
Druid Hill /
Stoke Rd
69. Bamfield 1.0 5.2 5.18 20.5mph
(North of
Pinkhams
Twist)
70. Church Hill / 2.6 4.7 4.66 19.1mph
School Rd /
Birchwood Rd
/ Guildford Rd
/ Wootton Rd
71. Redcatch Rd / 0.6 4.7 4.66 15.3mph
Axbridge Rd
72. Highridge Rd 0.8 3.7 3.73 14.8mph
73. Ridgeway 0.8 3.7 3.73 14.4mph
Lane (incl
section of
Wharnecliffe
Grdns)
74. Third Way 1.0 3.1 3.11 16.8mph
75. Frenchay 0.6 3.1 3.11 17.2mph
Park Rd /
B4058
(Begbrook Ln
to Froomshaw
Rd)
76. Lower High 0.3 3.1 3.11 12.6mph
Street
77. Whitchurch 0.6 3.1 3.11 15.9mph
Rd (from just
before
Colemead to
Church Rd)
78. Shaldon Rd / 1.4 2.8 2.76 15.4mph
Romney Ave

Page 63
OFFICIAL
79. Bamfield 0.5 2.1 2.07 25.3mph
(Pinkhams
Twist to
Paddock
Garden)
80. East Dundry 0.5 2.1 2.07 13.5mph
Rd
81. Highridge 1.1 1.8 1.78 18.4mph
Green
82. Avonmouth 0.6 1.6 1.55 18.2mph
Rd
83. Stockwood Ln 1.3 0.8 0.78 22.4mph
84. Ashton Vale 0.3 0.0 0.00 7.6mph
Rd
85. Begbrook 0.2 0.0 0.00 9.0mph
Park
86. Cater Rd 0.6 0.0 0.00 14.9mph
87. Chapel Rd 0.1 0.0 0.00 12.6mph
(Bishopsworth
)
88. Church Ln 0.2 0.0 0.00 16.0mph
89. Conham Rd / 0.2 0.0 0.00 Data not
Lower available
Conham Vale
90. Dowry Square 0.2 0.0 0.00 5.5mph
91. Frenchay 0.3 0.0 0.00 15.7mph
Park Rd /
B4058
(Froomshaw
Rd to
Begbrook
Park /
SGLOS)
92. Jane Street 0.1 0.0 0.00 7.4mph

93. Maggs Lane / 0.2 0.0 0.00 15.1mph
Washing
Pound Lane
94. Roman Rd 0.1 0.0 0.00 8.1mph
95. Wapping Rd 0.2 0.0 0.00 Data not
available
96. Old Market N/A 149.1 248.55 N/A (roundabout)
Roundabout
97. Bath Bridges N/A 74.6 198.84 N/A (roundabout)
Roundabout

Page 64
OFFICIAL
1 Adopted Full council Golden Motion 11 July 2023.pdf, Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036 p145,

One-City-Plan_2020
2 2019 National Travel Attitudes Study (NTAS) p10
3 2025 UK Parliament Office of Science and Technology’s report on the Public Health Impacts of

20mph (POST Study) p29
4 Determining Safe Speeds (2025) - The Road Safety Foundation
5 2025 POST Study, 2023 LOWER URBAN SPEED LIMITS IN EUROPE Report PACTS RST

(LUSTRE) p45, Interim evaluation of the implementation of 20 mph speed limits in Portsmouth
6 Reduced Sensitivity to Visual Looming Inflates the Risk Posed by Speeding Vehicles When Children

Try to Cross the Road - John P. Wann, Damian R. Poulter, Catherine Purcell, 2011
7 The relationship between impact speed and the probability of pedestrian fatality during a vehicle-

pedestrian crash 2019
8 LUSTRE p43, Review of City-Wide 30 km/h Speed Limit Benefits in Europe, Cycling injury risk in
London: A case-control study exploring the impact of cycle volumes, motor vehicle volumes, and road
characteristics including speed limits
9 Data from Welsh Government presented at Landor webinar, “Delivering 20mph”, 10/12/2025
10 STATS19 2021-2024, total casualties in Bristol 3900 (464 KSI), on roads recommended for 20mph

total casualties 1061 (141 KSI). Roads considered for 20mph represent 59 miles out of 1195 total in
Bristol’s Highways Network.
11 More 20mph zones could cut motor premiums – Esure | Insurance Times, Landor webinar,

“Delivering 20mph”, 10/12/2025
12 Kate Carpenter, Director of Operations Road Safety at Jacobs, referring to the Chartered Institute

of Highways and Transportation Report on Progressing the UK towards Safe Systems implementation
13 Stopping distances made simple RAC
14 A2018 ATKINS 20mph Research Study: Headline Report p52
15 Default 20mph speed limit on restricted roads | National monitoring report (July 2025) | Transport

for Wales
16 20mph Pilot Areas Monitoring Report, Bristol City Council, 2012 p32
17 2025 POST Study p5, Developing and implementing 20-mph speed limits in Edinburgh and Belfast:
mixed-methods study, Landor webinar, “Delivering 20mph”, 10/12/2025
18 2025 POST Study p21
19 Walking and Cycling Index 2025: Bristol, p19
20 Walking and Cycling Index 2025: Bristol p5
21 See footnote 13 and paragraph 4
22 An evaluation of the impacts of on vehicle emissions of a 20mph speed restriction in London
23 Review of City-Wide 30 km/h Speed Limit Benefits in Europe

24 Urban Transport Modelling: Investigation into effects of urban traffic
25 Recommendations | Air pollution: outdoor air quality and health | Guidance | NICE
26 Review of City-Wide 30 km/h Speed Limit Benefits in Europe

Page 65
OFFICIAL
Equality Impact Assessment [version 3.1]
Title: 20mph Review
Type of proposal: Function Status: New
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Keir Gallagher
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Road Safety Technical Lead

Step 1: What do we want to do?

What is the purpose of the proposal?
The objectives of the 20mph review are to:
• support progress towards council commitments to end deaths and serious injuries on our roads,
• improve safety and the feeling of safety for all, enable more walking and cycling, improve air
quality and reduce emissions.

The outcome will be an assessment of current 30mph roads for suitability for a lower speed limit of
20mph, and delivery of those changes. The proposal to committee to which this EqIA to attached is to
approve taking an identified set of recommendations for 20mph to public consultation, which, pending
the outcome of consultation, will be followed by a legal Transport Regulation Order process, and then
delivery.

Who will be affected?
☒ Bristol City Council workforce ☐ Service users ☒ The wider community
☐ Commissioned services ☒ City partners / Stakeholder organisations

Will the proposal have an equality impact?
☒ Yes ☐ No

Step 2: What information do we have? [complete if ‘Yes’ to an equality impact]
What data or evidence is there about who could be affected?

Data / Evidence Source Summary of what this tells us
[Include a reference where known]
Census Data 2021 Census Data tells us about the overall
demographic make-up up of the city
including where particular groups are over or
under-represented.
Bristol Key Facts November 2025 26% of households in Bristol have no car or
van (E&W 23%), 46% of households have one
car or van.

Page 66
OFFICIAL
Data / Evidence Source Summary of what this tells us
[Include a reference where known]
2024 Road Casualty Review Outlines the data on road traffic collisions
and casualties in Bristol, including the
disproportionate impacts of road danger on
certain age groups.
Bristol Ward Profile Tool This data tool compared the 34 Ward
with Bristol average including transport
related data such as demographics by
protected characteristic and car availability at
a locality level.
TravelWest Travel to Work Survey This annual survey helps us to understand
changes in commuting and working patterns
and builds up a robust dataset of how people
are travelling to work, across the region. It
also provides an opportunity for
employees to provide detail in their travel
choices, barriers to travel and provide wider
feedback on travel and transport in the
area.
Modeshift STARS programme and accreditation Where relevant, this data shows the travel
scheme patterns of local schools collected through
the MODESHIFT Stars Schools programme.
Quality of life in Bristol The Quality of Life (QoL) survey provides an
annual snapshot of the quality of life in
Bristol. There are several transport related
indicators which show us there
are significant disparities in the extent to
which people in Bristol experience transport
options, congestion, and road conditions etc.
in terms of accessibility, reliability and
quality etc. on the basis of their protected
and other relevant characteristics
Road Traffic Injury Risk Amongst GB Black and Ethnic Outlines GB-wide but Bristol applicable
Minority Populations evidence about the disproportionate impact
of road danger on Black, Asian and
minoritised ethnic pedestrians, identifying
that this group is disproportionately
impacted.
Disability and pedestrian road traffic injury: A scoping This peer-reviewed academic review gives an
review overview of research into any
disproportionate impacts of road danger on
Disabled people, identifying that this group is
disproportionately impacted.
Pregnancy is associated with more severe injuries from This peer-reviewed academic research
motor vehicle crashes identifies disproportionate impact of road
danger (specifically multi-vehicle collisions)
on pregnant people.
20mph speed limits and zones: public health impacts Parliamentary research highlighting that
(UK Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology) 20mph limits are effective at reducing road
danger and collisions.
Page 67
OFFICIAL
Data / Evidence Source Summary of what this tells us
[Include a reference where known]
Review of City-Wide 30 km/h Speed Limit Benefits in Academic meta-analysis of the impacts of
Europe 20mph limits across Europe, which finds
evidence of improvements in safety and air
quality.
Golden Motion: Make Bristol The UK’s Most Accessible In October 2024, Bristol City Council
City ModernGov - bristol.gov.uk unanimously approved a formal Motion to
make Bristol the UK’s most accessible city.
Central to this commitment is full
engagement and co-production with Disabled
people, ensuring that all our policy
committees collaborate with local Disabled
people led groups to identify and implement
improvements.

The Motion sets ambitious goals, with a
primary focus on enhancing accessibility in
transport, alongside a broader commitment
to equity and inclusivity. To lead this effort,
the council has pledged to work closely with
the Bristol Disability Equality Commission,
which represents major Disabled people’s
organisations in the city, as well as other
local Disability led organisations.
Additional comments: Overall, there is comprehensive evidence that many groups, but especially
minoritised ethnic communities, people who live in areas of deprivation, men, and Disabled people are
disproportionately impacted by road danger and collisions. 20mph limits will improve safety for
everyone, but because of the disproportionate impact of road danger on some groups, this overall
improvement will have a positive impact on inequalities faced by these groups.

Do you have relevant diversity data for the following protected characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☐ Gender Reassignment
☐ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☒ Pregnancy/Maternity ☒ Race
☐ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☐ Sexual Orientation

Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
We do not hold information on the impact of road danger on all groups with protected characteristics,
either within Bristol or from wider evidence. There is no reason to believe that the proposals could have
any negative implications on any groups with protected characteristics.

We know there are gaps in local diversity data, especially where this is has not historically been included
in statutory reporting. Census data is currently collected every 10 years.

Page 68
OFFICIAL
How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
Early stakeholder engagement has been undertaken with internal stakeholders, bus operators, Avon and
Somerset Police, the West of England Combined Authority and ward councillors. Groups and
communities that could be affected have not yet been explicitly consulted because (a) the evidence
available from similar schemes elsewhere and historic similar schemes in Bristol does not identify a likely
negative impact on any groups and (b) these groups will be approached as part of full public consultation
so their input can be properly gathered.

Measures which govern or restrict the use of public roads require a Traffic Regulation Order (TRO). UK
law requires that TROs be in place to enable the police or, in the case of yellow lines and bus lanes, the
council, to enforce these restrictions. To create a TRO we must consult with the emergency services and
other relevant public bodies. Wherever appropriate we also consult with local interest groups such as
residents, traders or community groups that might be affected. Advertisement of the TRO then place by
placing a notice in the local press and displaying notices in the roads affected. For this scheme, we will
also undertake non-statutory consultation in advance of the TRO stage to ensure we gather as much
input as possible in advance of developing the TRO.

How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
We will approach a wide group of stakeholders, including communities and groups that could be
impacted from an equalities perspective, in advance of the paper being brought to Committee, to
highlight that public consultation is expected to follow on this issue, and that their input would be
especially valued. If the paper is approved at committee, this will then be followed by a six-week public
engagement that will facilitate both stakeholder and individual responses. During the engagement, we
will monitor responses and where it appears that we have low levels of engagement from groups with
protected characteristics that may be disproportionately affected we will undertake targeted efforts to
engage these groups, including in-person meetings if necessary.

The engagement will be designed to ensure all content is accessible.

Any objections from the TRO consultation will be considered before the proposal is approved and the
TRO is put in place. If we receive feedback which indicates there are significant equality issues raised
that have not been identified in this Equality Impact Assessment, then we will update this document to
reflect this, along with details of any required mitigations or changes to the proposal before approval.

Step 3: Who might the proposal impact? [complete if ‘Yes’ to an equality impact]

Could the proposal affect people disproportionately because of their characteristics?
GENERAL COMMENTS
This proposal is unlikely to have a disproportionate negative impact on equalities groups. Reducing speeds to
20mph aims to improve safety. This proposal is to change speeds only, no roads will be closed, no parking will be
impacted. There may be a negligible impact on a very small minority of journeys, especially at night or at
particularly quiet periods, which could impact those more reliant on their own vehicle. Any impact would be a
matter of seconds, and would represent only a minor inconvenience as roads remains accessible and safety
remains the main concern.

Safety
Safety is a key concern, especially for groups more vulnerable to road traffic incidents. Changes will improve road
safety for virtually all residents. Because some groups are disproportionately impacted by road danger, they will
disproportionately benefit from an improvement to road safety.

Page 69
OFFICIAL
Signage and Visibility
Clear and consistent signage is essential for all users, particularly those with visual impairments, low literacy, or
limited proficiency in English. This can be supported through the use of concise language, high-contrast visuals,
and universally recognisable symbols and icons. Clear differentiation between types of transport infrastructure—
such as footways, cycle lanes, carriageways, and public transport lanes—will further assist in navigation and
wayfinding for all groups.

Contractors
All contractors involved in delivering the scheme will be expected to demonstrate a clear commitment to equality,
diversity, and inclusion. This includes understanding and complying with the Equality Act 2010 and the Public
Sector Equality Duty. Contractors should show how equality of opportunity is embedded within their
organisational practices and how services are reviewed and adapted to meet diverse user needs. It is also
recognised that construction activity may disproportionately affect some groups. Contractors will be required to
minimise disruption and adhere to inclusive working practices throughout delivery.
PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Children in the most deprived areas are more likely to be injured in motor traffic collisions
than those in the least deprived areas
Mitigations: Disproportionate benefit due to over-representation in collisions
Age: Older People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Older people are more likely to be injured in motor traffic collisions.
Some older people who are less mobile and less able to walk significant distances may be
disproportionately impacted by the proposal.
Mitigations: Disproportionate benefit due to over-representation in collisions
Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Disabled people have overall lower car ownership levels.
However, some Disabled people who have impairments which mean they are more
dependent on a motor vehicle as a driver or passenger may be disproportionately
impacted.
More women than men are Disabled.
Disabled people are more likely to be injured in motor traffic collisions.
Mitigations: Disproportionate benefit due to over-representation in collisions.
See general comments above
Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Men are more likely to be inured in road traffic collisions.
Women are statistically more likely to have unpaid caring responsibilities for children and
older adults, and this may mean they are more reliant on having their own transport
Mitigations: Disproportionate benefit on men due to over-representation in collisions.
See general comments above
Sexual orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Pregnancy / Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Maternity
Potential impacts: Disproportionate benefit due to greater risk of serious injury in event of collision
Mitigations:
Gender Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
reassignment
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Minoritised ethnic communities are more likely to be injure in road traffic collisions.
Black people in the UK are less likely to hold a driving licence and more likely to rely on
public transport.

Page 70
OFFICIAL
Mitigations: Disproportionate benefit due to over-representation in collisions
Religion or Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Belief
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
civil partnership
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS
Socio-economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: Disproportionate positive impact due to over-representation in collisions
Mitigations:
Care Experienced Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: People who are dependent on motor vehicles to provide care for others may be
disproportionately impacted by the proposal.
Mitigations: See general comments above
Other groups
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:

Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their characteristics?
Yes. Changes will improve road safety for virtually all residents. Because some groups are
disproportionately impacted by road danger, they will disproportionately benefit from an improvement
to road safety.

Step 4: Impact [complete if ‘Yes’ to an equality impact]

Has this equality impact assessment led to any changes?
No. Only benefits have been identified.

Action Plan
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale
Groups and communities likely to be affected will be Road Safety March – June 2026
proactively engaged in advance of and during the public Technical Lead (in
consultation to ensure they are aware of the changes and the collaboration with
opportunity to respond. Engagement
Team)

How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
A monitoring plan will be developed to ensure impacts on road safety and other objectives such as air quality are
measured as far as possible. Isolating the impacts of individual road safety interventions is challenging given the
wide range of variables that can impact safety, and average collision rates need to be considered over multiple
years before robust evidence can be gathered. Given this, we do not expect to be able to identify the exact impact
of the measures on an individual road, but we may be able to identify some city-wide impacts, although this will
be caveated by the impacts of other projects and behaviour change schemes. We will explore the potential of
collaboration with external partners (e.g. academia) who may be able to undertake research accounting for
Page 71
OFFICIAL
variable to assess the impacts, but any resource invested in such research would need to be proportionate to the
benefits.

Step 5: Review
Equality and Inclusion Team Review Director Sign-Off: Alex Hearn
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

Date: 06/03/2026 Date: 23/02/2026

Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.

Page 72
OFFICIAL
Environmental Impact Assessment [version 1.2]
Proposal title: 20mph Review
Assessment type: ☒ Key Decision ☐ Business Case Development
Committee date (if key decision): 03/2026
Project stage and type: ☐ Initial Idea Mandate ☐ Outline Business Case ☐ Full Business Case
Directorate: Growth & Regeneration Assessment author name: Keir Gallagher

Step 1: Describe the project
1.1 What is the purpose of the proposal?
The objectives of the 20mph review are to:
• support progress towards council commitments to end deaths and serious injuries on our roads,
• improve safety and the feeling of safety for all, enable more walking and cycling, improve air
quality and reduce emissions.

The outcome will be an assessment of current 30mph roads for suitability for a lower speed limit of 20mph, and
delivery of those changes. The proposal to committee to which this EqIA to attached is to approve taking an
identified set of recommendations for 20mph to public consultation, which, pending the outcome of consultation,
will be followed by a legal Transport Regulation Order process, and then delivery.

1.2 Will the proposal have an environmental impact?
The environmental impacts being considered are those that will arise from the decision / business case being
proposed. If you are unsure about how to approach this contact the Environmental Performance Team.

☒ Yes ☐ No
If ‘Yes’ complete steps 2-4 below. If ‘No’ explain how you know there will be no environmental impact:

Step 2: Assess the environmental impacts [complete if ‘Yes’ to an environmental impact]
2.1 Does the proposal create any benefits for the environment, or have any adverse impacts?
Before starting, review the categories below and consider whether or not the proposal creates environmental
impacts in each one, both now and in the future. There is space to describe any cross-cutting issues at the beginning.

Reasonable efforts should be made to quantify impacts wherever possible additional guidance is available on the
Source. It is not recommended to use Copilot to generate assessment details.

Where the proposal creates beneficial impacts, consider what actions will be committed to by BCC to enhance them.
Where the proposal creates adverse impacts consider what actions will be committed to by BCC to mitigate them.

CROSS CUTTING ISSUES

The benefits apply equally to both emissions and air quality:

There are many factors which impact upon air pollution levels on a daily and annual basis, and which impact
emissions from transport, and it is difficult to quickly and easily separate the influence of these from the impact of
measures such as the introduction of 20mph limits. How drivers respond to 20mph limits, whether they are

Page 73
OFFICIAL
enforced effectively, whether the number of vehicle trips changes and the driving styles on a particular road are
also likely to be important in the overall air pollution impact of this measure.

Overall, a smoothing of driving style and cutting out of the acceleration phase from 20mph to 30mph is
considered to be beneficial for emissions of harmful pollutants, which impact both climate change and local air
quality. A study from Berlin concluded that the introduction of 30kph limits (18.6mph) resulted in up to 30%
reduction in particulate emissions and 15% reduction in traffic related NOX emissions but enforcement of the limit
and smoothing of flow with traffic light coordination was thought to play an important role . A 2013 study
conducted in London, backed up with real-world monitoring showed that 20mph speed limits resulted in a
reduction in emissions of particulates and NOX from diesel vehicles. A Europe-wide study found that an average
emissions reduction of 18%.

54% of people in Bristol say they would walk more, and 52% say they would cycle more if more streets were
20mph. The changes may therefore support a shift towards sustainable travel, which could further reduce
emissions. It is difficult to quantify the exact impact on this shift for a given scheme, due to the wide range of
variables, but one study found Bristol’s original 20mph speed limits (which this is building upon) saw a 20%
increase in cycling. The NICE Guidance on outdoor air quality suggested that 20mph limits should be considered as
an air quality improvement measure.

Evidence of negligible worsening of air pollution or emissions from 20mph speed limits appears to be limited.
…

See Cross Cutting Benefits
Climate mitigation:
Becoming carbon neutral
Benefits
BCC has committed to
becoming carbon neutral for
its direct activities by 2025, Following roll-out, if budget is available, a programme of work to
and to support the city in improve compliance will be undertaken to ensure the potential
achieving a Just Transition to benefits highlighted above are maximised.
Enhancing
carbon neutrality by 2030. actions

How will the proposal affect
the use of fossil fuels or
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
other energy consuming
activities by BCC, its
suppliers, or by citizens?
Adverse
impacts
Try to provide quantifiable
information on the
proposal’s activities. The
Env. Performance team can
assist with converting this to
an assessment of emissions. Mitigating
actions
Further guidance
☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Climate resilience:
Adapting our services and
the city to the changing Benefits
climate

Page 74
OFFICIAL
Bristol’s climate is already
changing, and the frequency
of extreme weather will Enhancing
continue to become more actions
likely over time.

Consider how the proposal Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
will perform during warmer
wetter winters; hotter drier
summers; more intense and Adverse
frequent extreme weather. impacts

The proposal should be
designed to reduce the risks
to people and assets from
these changes. The Env. Mitigating
Performance team can assist actions
if you are unsure how.

Further guidance
☒ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Nature recovery:
Wildlife and habitats
Benefits
BCC has committed to 30%
of its land being managed
for nature and to halve its
use of pesticides by 2030.

Consider how your proposal Enhancing
can improve green spaces, actions
retain existing trees, create
new wildlife friendly
habitats, and/or improve Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
wildlife friendly practices
and management of green
spaces. Adverse
impacts
If your proposal will lead to a
reduction in habitat within
Bristol, then consider what
actions can be taken to
deliver a net gain in Mitigating
biodiversity. actions

Further guidance
☒ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Waste and circular
economy: Consumption of
resources and handling of Benefits
waste

Page 75
OFFICIAL
Bristol aims to become a
zero-waste city.
Enhancing
Consider what resources will actions
be used by the proposal,
how they can be minimised
or swapped for less Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
impactful ones, where they
will be sourced from, and
what will happen to any Adverse
waste generated. impacts

The proposal should be
designed to maximise the
waste hierarchy; from most
to least preferable options –
Mitigating
reduce/avoid, re-use, recycle, actions
incinerate with energy
recovery, dispose via landfill.
Further guidance
☒ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Air quality & pollution See Cross Cutting Benefits
prevention: supporting
healthy air and minimising Benefits
the risk of pollution
incidents
Following roll-out, if budget is available, a programme of work to
BCC has a statutory duty to improve compliance will be undertaken to ensure the potential
prevent pollution incidents Enhancing benefits highlighted above are maximised.
from occurring to land or actions
water, and to improve local
air quality.
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
Internal combustion engines
and solid-fuel heating
significantly worsen air Adverse
quality which is harmful to impacts
human health.

Consider what steps will be
taken to prevent pollution
incidents from occurring and
Mitigating
to improve local air quality. actions

Further guidance
☐ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Step 3: Commit to actions [complete if ‘Yes’ to an environmental impact]
3.1 Auditable action plan
Use this section summarise and assign responsibility for any actions you have identified during the assessment.
Actions identified in section two can be grouped together if named responsibility is under the same person.

Page 76
OFFICIAL
This action plan should be updated at each stage of the project. Please be aware that the Sustainable City and
Climate Change Service will use this action plan as an audit checklist during the project’s implementation or
operation.
Action commitment Responsible Officer Completion date
Following roll-out, if budget is available, a programme of work to Keir Gallagher 2027
improve compliance will be undertaken to ensure the potential
benefits highlighted above are maximised.

Step 4: Send to Environmental Performance Team
Send your assessment to the Environmental Performance Team allowing five working days for comment and
feedback. Assessments will only be signed-off when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers
regarding the environmental impact of the proposal1.

Step 5: Sign-off - for completion by the Environmental Performance Team
If significant impacts have been identified they will be summarised here by the Environmental Performance Team.

Summary of significant beneficial impacts:
N/A

Summary of significant adverse impacts:
N/A

Submitting Env. Performance
Keir Gallagher Daniel Shelton
author: Team reviewer:
Date: 19/12/2025 Date: 05/01/2026

1
Review by the Environmental Performance Team confirms there is sufficient information for decision makers to consider the
most relevant environmental impacts at the current stage of the proposal. This is not an endorsement or approval of the
proposal.
Page 77
OFFICIAL
Decision Risk Assessment [Version 1.0]
Title of Report 20mph
Report Author Keir Gallagher
Date of Completion 18/12/2025
Purpose of this risk assessment
Risk Management supports good corporate governance which in turn supports effective decision making and improved performance. Applying risk management processes will help strategic decision makers make informed
decisions about of policy decisions and service delivery options.
Risk is the chance of something happening that will have an impact on achievement of the council’s aims or objectives. Risk can be both Positive Opportunities (for example, pursuing a grant or changing a way of working to
increase efficiencies) and Negative Threats (such as the risk of financial loss or reputational damage to the council).
Risk management is the identification, evaluation, management and review of these opportunities or threats.
This risk assessment is intended to:
• Demonstrate that all significant risks related to the decision have been considered.
• Provides evidence that the decision maker has been provided with sufficient information about risks in terms of probability and impact
• Explain how the risks will be managed.
Guidance The assessment requires the report author to record ‘significant’ risks identified in relation to the decision.
•Section 1 – Threat Risks - Identify and record the threat risks in relation to taking the proposed recommendation(s) (including the risks of implementation), and the risks of not taking the recommended
action.
•Section 2 – Opportunity Risks - Identify and record the opportunity risks related to taking the proposed recommendation.
When identifying risks consider the type of risk – these can be related to finances, reputation, governance, technology, etc
In addition, consider the actions and controls that serve to mitigate the risk or increase the opportunity.

Page 78
Please contact riskmanagement@bristol.gov.uk for further support.
Further risk
management guidance
can be found on the
Source https://bristolcouncil.sharepoint.com/sites/Corporate/SitePages/risk-management.aspx
Updates automatically Updates automatically
Threat Risks
Does the
Status Current Risk Level risk exceed
Monetary Impact of Risk Council Risk
Risk Description the Financial Risk

Risk Rating
Appetite for the

Likelihood Risk Level
Risk Title Key Causes Key Consequences Risk Category Key Mitigations council's Exposure
Impact
risk type identified
risk
Open / Closed £k appetite?

Although surveys Treat:We are working closely with the communciations
repeatedly find and PR teams to ensure effecive communications about
broad public the public benefits of 20mph limits. We are working
support for 20mph with the engagement team to ensure as many people as
on residential roads, possible feed into the public consultation, but also that
Negative schemes elsewhere we are able to differentiate input from those most directly
public have encountered impacted by road dangers, given addressing this is the
Lack of clear
response vocal opposition Reputational damage for objective of the project. A robust evidence base has been
communication of the Open Reputation 2 5 10 Medium £0 Cautious Yes £0.00
impacting from some groups. the Council. developed to ensure we are confident of the positive
benefits of 20mph limits
Council Misinformation impacts.
reputation about the impacts
may be shared by Tolerate: There will always be some ongoing risk given
those in opposition, there is often public opposition to changes that make a
which could have a positive improvement to road safety, until those changes
negative impact on have had an opportunity to 'bed in'. Some risk will
Council reputation. therefore have to be tolerated.

Although surveys Treat:We are working closely with the communciations
repeatedly find and PR teams to ensure effecive communications about
broad public the public benefits of 20mph limits. We are working
support for 20mph with the engagement team to ensure as many people as

Page 79
on residential roads, possible feed into the public consultation, but also that
Negative schemes elsewhere Lack of clear we are able to differentiate input from those most directly
public have encountered communication of the Scheme not progressed, or impacted by road dangers, given addressing this is the
response vocal opposition benefits of 20mph limits, progressed with changes Programme/Project objective of the project. A robust evidence base has been
Open 2 7 14 FALSE £0 Open No £0.00
impacting from some groups. lack of understanding of that lessen the positive Management developed to ensure we are confident of the positive
progression of Misinformation benefits of 20mph limits impacts impacts.
project about the impacts by key decision makers.
may be shared by Tolerate: There will always be some ongoing risk given
those in opposition, there is often public opposition to changes that make a
which could have a positive improvement to road safety, until those changes
negative impact on have had an opportunity to 'bed in'. Some risk will
Council reputation. therefore have to be tolerated.

0 FALSE FALSE #N/A £0.00
0 FALSE FALSE #N/A £0.00
0 FALSE FALSE #N/A £0.00
0 FALSE FALSE #N/A £0.00
0 FALSE FALSE #N/A £0.00
0 FALSE FALSE #N/A £0.00
£0.00

Averse
Minimalist

Cautious
Open
Updates Automatically Updates Automatically
Opportunity Risks

Status Current Risk Level
Monetary Impact of Risk

Risk Rating
Financial Opportunity Exposure

Likelihood Risk Level
Opportunity
Risk Risk Description Key Causes Key Consequence Risk Category Key Mitigations
Impact
Risk Title
Open / Closed £k

0 FALSE £0.00
0 FALSE £0.00
0 FALSE £0.00
0 FALSE £0.00
0 FALSE £0.00
0 FALSE £0.00
0 FALSE £0.00
0 FALSE £0.00
£0.00

Page 80
Threat Risks Opportunity Risks
Number of Open Risks 2 Number of Open Risks 0

CRITICAL 0 SIGNIFICANT 0

HIGH 0 HIGH 0

MEDIUM 1 MEDIUM 0

LOW 0 LOW 0

Page 81
Cost Risk Exposure £0.00 Cost Opportunity Exposure £0.00

Number of risks exceeding risk appetite 1
Number of risks within risk appetite 1
LIKELIHOOD AND IMPACT RISK RATING SCORING CRITERIA
Likelihood Guidance
Likelihood Ratings 1 to 4
Likelihood
1 2 3 4

Description Might happen on rare occasions. Will possibly happen, possibly on several occasions. Will probably happen, possibly at regular intervals. Likely to happen, possibly frequently.

Numerical Likelihood Less than 10% Less than 50% 50% or more 75% or more

Severity of Impact Guidance (Risk to be assessed against all of the Categories, and the highest score used in the matrix).

Impact Levels 1 to 7
Impact Category
1 3 5 7

Severe effect on service provision or a Corporate Extremely severe service disruption. Significant customer
Noticeable and significant effect (positive or negative) on service provision.
Strategic Plan priority area. opposition. Legal action.

Very limited effect (positive or negative) Effect could not be managed within a reasonable time
on service provision. Impact can be Effect may require considerable /additional resource frame or by a short-term allocation of resources and may
Service provision but will not require a major strategy change. require major strategy changes. The Council risks ‘special
managed within normal working
arrangements. measures’.

Effect may require some additional resource, but manageable in a reasonable time
Officer / Member forced to resign.
frame.

A more severe but manageable impact (positive or

Page 82
Noticeable (positive or negative) impact on the community or a more manageable
negative) on a significant number of vulnerable groups A lasting and noticeable impact on a significant number of
Communities Minimal impact on community. impact on a smaller number of vulnerable groups / individuals which is not likely to
/ individuals which is not likely to last more than twelve vulnerable groups / individuals.
last more than six months.
months.

No effect (positive or negative) on the Serious local discharge of pollutant or source of
Environmental Short term effect (positive or negative) on the natural and or built environment. Lasting effect on the natural and or built environment.
natural and built environment. community annoyance that requires remedial action.
Financial Loss / Gain Under £0.5m Between £0.5m - £3m Between £3m - £5m More than £5m

Fraud & Corruption Loss Under £50k Between £50k - £100k Between £100k - £1m More than £1m
No significant legal implications or action Criminal prosecution anticipated and or civil litigation (> 1
Legal Tribunal / BCC legal team involvement required (potential for claim). Criminal prosecution anticipated and / or civil litigation.
is anticipated. person).

Significant injury or ill health of citizens or colleagues causing short-term disability / Major injury or ill health of citizens or colleagues may Death of citizen(s) or colleague(s).
Personal Safety Minor injury to citizens or colleagues.
absence from work. result in. long term disability / absence from work. Significant long-term disability / absence from work.
Programme / Project Slippage causes significant delay to delivery of key
Significant issues threaten delivery of the entire project.
Management Minor delays and/or budget overspend project milestones; and/or major budget overspends.
Slippage causes significant delay to delivery of key project milestones, and/or
but can be brought back on schedule with
(Including developing budget overspends.
this project stage.
commercial enterprises)

No threat to delivery of the project on Major threat to delivery of the project on time and to
time and to budget and no threat to No threat to overall delivery of the project and the identified benefits / outcomes. budget, and achievement of one or more benefits / Could lead to project being cancelled or put on hold.
identified benefits / outcomes. outcomes.

Serious potential for enhancement of, or damage to, Highly significant potential for enhancement of, or damage
Significant public or partner interest although limited potential for enhancement of,
reputation and the willingness of other parties to to, reputation and the willingness of other parties to
or damage to, reputation.
collaborate or do business with the council. collaborate or do business with the council.

Minimal and transient loss of public or
Reputation partner trust. Contained within the
Dissatisfaction reported through council complaints procedure but contained within Dissatisfaction regularly reported through council Intense local, national and potentially international media
individual service.
the council. complaints procedure. attention.

Local MP involvement. Higher levels of local or national interest. Viral social media or online pick-up.

Some local media/social media interest. Higher levels of local media / social media interest. Public enquiry or poor external assessor report.
20mph Review: Appendix F – Details of internal and external consultation
A full public consultation will be carried out in relation to the review, followed by a statutory Speed Limit Order (including statutory
consultation) process. In advance of this, the following internal stakeholders and key external stakeholders have been consulted and
provided the opportunity to feedback on road-by-road recommendations:

Internal:

• All mandatory consultees under the Highways and Transport Quality Assurance (QA) process
• Project managers leading other schemes on roads which may be impacted
• All councillors
• The Air Quality Team

Page 83
External:

• The West of England Combined Authority
• Neighbouring Local Authorities (Bath and North East Somerset, North Somerset, South Gloucestershire) relating to proposals for
roads which pass into their network
• Avon and Somerset Police (responsible for enforcing speed limits)
• First Bus
• Stagecoach
• One City Board (provided overview of the 20mph review, but not full details of individual recommendations)

OFFICIAL
General Feedback
Stakeholder Stakeholder response
Internal Highways and General support for proposals, with the cross-cutting benefits for other teams highlighted (e.g. more
Transport Teams, and Air walking and cycling, improved air quality). A small number of road-specific concerns (see below)
Quality Team.
Transport Committee Supportive, recognised that further input from key stakeholder may require a further look at some
Members and Chair strategic corridors, but that these should continue to be included in consultation so this feedback can
be gathered.
Ward Councillors General support, with some specific queries/concerns about individual roads (see below).
Avon and Somerset Police General support (“With regard to the proposed 20mph Speed Limit Review, the information provided
identifies that the average speed data collected is commensurate with the introduction of 20mph speed
limits on the roads mentioned within the attached spreadsheet, with collision data being supportive of
the reduction in posted speed limit.”). Request for another opportunity to consider proposals once

Page 84
other stakeholder feedback was reflected, which has since been shared.
First Bus & Stagecoach General strong opposition. Concern over the impact on bus journey times on strategic corridors.
(grouped due to similar
response) Striking the right balance between achieving Bristol City Council’s objectives of ending deaths and
serious injuries on our roads and improving public transport is important and we have therefore
engaged closely with the Public Transport Team and bus operators from the outset of this project.

While the evidence of road safety improvements of 20mph is comprehensive (see evidence base
included in Appendix A), the evidence of impacts on bus journey times and knock-on impacts on
patronage or operability in already-congested urban areas is limited. Overall evidence of impacts on
driving journey times indicates likely average impacts between 0-6 seconds across most roads under
consideration. The vast majority of roads under consideration have average speeds below 20mph.

First Bus raised an objection to the original Traffic Regulation Order for the initial 20mph rollout, which
they withdrew subject to extensive monitoring being carried out in the pilot area, which they led. First
Bus reported based on their monitoring that the pilot did not adversely affect bus journey times or

OFFICIAL
reliability, and they did not raise any further objections or concerns relating to the rollout, which
included some major bus corridors.

The Road Safety Team is committed to an evidence-led road-by-road approach as opposed to a
‘blanket’ approach, and bus operators were approached early in the hope that they would be able to
provide data and evidence that would help identify impacts of specific proposals on bus journey times,
so that mitigations could be considered for any significant impacts and the right balance could be
struck. A blanket approach of retaining 30mph due to the existence of a bus route or strategic bus
corridor was not considered appropriate in the context of the road safety improvements offered by
20mph.

Unfortunately, bus operators have been unable to provide data or evidence to support concerns
relating to significant impacts on journey time, either based on local data, or evidence from similar
schemes elsewhere in urban areas. Stagecoach did provide one example of the impact on an

Page 85
unspecified bus route from Wales, but without understanding the nature of that route, it’s difficult to
apply these learnings to similar roads in Bristol.

The overarching evidence (see Appendix A) does not indicate 20mph on strategic corridors and an
effective and well-patronised bus service are mutually exclusive aims.

A critical consideration is that many of Bristol’s key strategic bus corridors are also strategic Local
Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan corridors and routes, represent key cycling routes in and out of
the city, and have high (in some cases extremely high) casualty rates. Limited available roads space and
investment via CRSTS on these routes has generally been prioritised for bus lanes as opposed to cycle
lanes and/or wider pavements or pedestrian safety improvements.

While there are good reasons for this prioritisation, given the importance of improving Bristol’s public
transport, there are limited remaining alternative options to improve safety on these key active travel
routes beyond a reduction in speed limits which, coupled with often significant investment in bus

OFFICIAL
priority, is considered by the road safety team, the public transport team, and the policy team to
strike a sensible balance.

We have responded to both operators and requested again more detailed information to help us
identify any specific proposals which may have a non-negligible impact, and what that impact would
be, especially for peak journeys. At this point, this has not been provided.
The West of England WECA indicated general support, especially from the Transport Strategy team, and a suggestion that
Combined Authority some shorter stretches of 30mph (e.g. 800m of Temple Way, currently proposed to retain 30mph) be
(WECA) considered for 20mph to avoid short changes that may impact overall compliance. Concerns were
raised from Transport Operations with regards to the impacts on bus journey times on key arterial
routes, with a request for any data to show the impact on individual bus services.

We have highlighted that the bus time data available to BCC (Analyse Bus Open Data, ABOD) does not
provide sufficient granularity to allow for modelling, and that bus operators have so far been

Page 86
unwilling/unable to share the more detailed data which would enable that. WECA have undertaken
some initial analysis of ABOD on one bus route to explore whether this can inform any conclusions, but
this was not provided in sufficient time to inform the proposals for engagement, and further work is
required to explore this.

We will therefore continue to engage with WECA to explore the possibility of modelling potential impact
on a selection of bus routes. If this is possible, findings will be collected as part of the engagement
process so they can be properly considered in the final decision of which roads should be progressed to
TRO.
One City Board One City Board were provided with an overview of the project to date, and the headline
recommendation of the number and nature of roads recommended for 20mph.

While there was no formal decision or vote, board members expressed support for the project and
approach. Walk, Wheel, Cycle Trust reached out to reiterate their strong support following the meeting.

OFFICIAL
Road-specific feedback
A range of feedback relating to specific proposals was provided by stakeholders. This included a number of positive endorsement by
councillors and others, but as these required no further action, they have not been included below.

Changes following engagement
Road section Road Safety Team action
Washing Pound Lane, Maggs These roads align with the 20mph criteria but are predominantly the responsibility of Bath and
Lane, Church Lane North East Somerset Council (B&NES) and so were not included in the initial considerations for
engagement. Feedback from councillors was that this same reasoning was given in the original
rollout, and there is therefore a risk that we are in a situation where we do not improve safety
because of B&NES decisions, and vice versa.

We have therefore engaged with B&NES, who are supportive of a coordinated approach to include

Page 87
these roads, including the sections within B&NES boundaries, within the 20mph review, pending
any outcomes of public consultation.
Bamfield Following feedback from WECA and local councillors, we are including all of Bamfield as
recommended 20mph, to avoid a short stretch of 30mph which may impact compliance in the
30mph section.
Cater Road Suggestion from policy team that Cater should be included in 20mph for consultation, given
prevalence of parking on the road. This had been updated.
Airport Road and Callington There was a query from ward councillors as to why Airport Road and Callington Road had not been
Road included, while A4 and A37 were. This was primarily due to the fact that these 30mph act as
transitions to 40mph roads (with 40mph roads out of scope for changes). However, this has been
reviewed and a section of Airport Road with residential frontages, and a section of Callington Road,
have now been included in recommendations. If these proposals proceed following consultation, a
staggered reduction from 40mph to 20mph, with a 30mph section in between, or additional
measures to ensure drivers have advance notice of the reduction to 20mph, will be explored.
Frenchay Park Road The original recommendations included a retaining a section of 30mph between Begbrook Lane
and Oaklands Drive. However, Transport Development Management highlighted that this stretch of

OFFICIAL
road forms part of a key route to Begbrook Primary Academy. Given this was already only a 600m
stretch of 30mph, and the upper limit of DfT recommendations in term of the length of speed limit
changes, this recommendation has been revised to 20mph.
Faraday road and Hotwell Transport Development Management highlighted the importance of pedestrian access to
Gyratory Cumberland Piazza, across Faraday and the section of Hotwells Road which connects to the
Portway. These had previously been recommended to retain 30mph.

Given this feedback, the recommended extents of the 20mph on Faraday road has been moved
further south. Given the constrained environment, and the staggered reduction from 40mph on the
Portway, this is not possible on Hotwell Road.
Wells Road (A37), in particular There was some stakeholder feedback, and concern from local councillors, regarding 20mph on
southern section from Airport the wider section of Wells Road with a central reservation, from Airport Road to just north of
Road to boundary with B&NES Whitecross Ave.

Page 88
However, Transport Development Management also highlighted a new development planned at
New Fosseway, which will increase the amount of people walking and cycling on this stretch of
road, and also reiterated that there are two schools close to this section of Wells Road, St.
Bernadette Catholic Secondary School and Oasis Academy John Williams. The later of these has a
priority area which includes the residential roads to the east of Wells Road, meaning many pupils
need to cross this section of road to get to/from school.

It is a residential road with many sections of on-street parking (which is a DfT-indicator of good
compliance).

On balance, this section will be proposed to retain its 30mph speed limit.
Stoke Hill, Druid Hill, Parry’s One ward councillor opposed 20mph on these roads, highlighting in particular lack of local
Lane, and Shirehampton Road support. There are continuous residential frontages along these roads, although they are set back,
and there are some complaints from the public about unsafe speeds.

OFFICIAL
Following this feedback, the section of Shirehampton Road and Parry’s Lane from Cedar Park to
Cross Elms Lane will be proposed to retain 30mph.

The rationale for is that houses on this section are well set back and not generally visible from the
road, with high walls on both sides, so this would not undermine the consistency in approach and
create a section of 30mph that is inconsistent with other parts of the city, where residential
frontages are more apparent. It would, however, still leave many residents living directly on 30mph
roads without shared footways, impacting, for example, the safety of people walking or cycling
directly from their front door.

Responses to other concerns
Road section Road Safety Team response
Bath Road (West Town Lane to There was mixed feedback to proposals for 20mph on Bath Road from West Town Lane to Bath

Page 89
Bath Bridges) Bridges, with some support given safety benefits and some opposition, including from WECA
Transport Operations team (focussed on potential impact on bus journey times).

Bath Road is identified as a route in need of improvements in the Local Cycling and Walking
Infrastructure Plan, but there are currently no significant cycling or walking safety improvements
planned or budgeted for. Limited road space means the prioritisation of a bus lane as part of
ongoing CRSTS works will leave no space for a protected cycle lane. There are some plans to
provide alternative safer cycling routes, but these will not be finalised for some time and will not
cover the entire route. Evidence suggests many cyclists will still opt to use the most direct route,
and their safety must be considered.

There are a number of short stretches with a central reservation and multi-lanes which could be
considered for retention of 30mph (e.g. Totterdown Bridge to Three Lamps). However, these are all
shorter than the 600m which the DfT advises should be the minimum length of a speed limit. WECA
also raised concerns about short stretches of 30mph.

OFFICIAL
On balance, especially as the entirety of Bath Road is an LCWIP cycling route, the proposals for
20mph for this stretch has been retained so that further feedback from the public, and hopefully
further evidence from bus operators, can help inform a final decision in due course.
Falcondale Road Some concerns were raised about compliance with 20mph on Falcondale Road, especially at the
northern end, due to its width (although some other ward councillors were supportive), and it
should be noted that this is a residential road and that the evidence clearly indicates the greatest
safety benefit of 20mph is on slightly faster roads.

One option could be to retain 30mph until Stoke Lane, and begin 20mph south of this, but further
feedback from councillors has been sought. Given the residential nature of the road, the Road
Safety Team feels it is appropriate to include it in consultation to give local residents and others
who use the road the opportunity to input into where 20mph should start on this road.
Knole Lane and Henbury Road Local councillors raised some concerns about these proposals, but were happy to include in public
consultation, and flagged that there may be a need for some new Double Yellow Lines to ensure

Page 90
safe sight lines at junctions. Our commitment to a consistent approach would make it difficult to
justify 30mph on Knole Lane in particular, as nearby similar-looking roads are already 20mph.
Nags Head Hill / Bryant’s Hill One ward councillor objected to 30mph on this stretch, primarily based on concerns of increased
through traffic on Furber road, which is an ongoing issue. Unfortunately, speed limits differences
between ‘main’ and ‘side’ roads are not an effective means of reducing through traffic on residential
side roads, and nearby councillors had requested 20mph on similar nearby roads (Air Balloon, Bell
Hill, Speedwell). Consistency across similar roads is critical as the public do not know when they
pass from one ward to another. The recommendation of 20mph on this road has been retained.
Alternative options to address through traffic on Furber Lane will be explored but are not within
scope of the 20mph Review.

OFFICIAL
Agenda Item 9

Committee Report

KEY DECISION OR FOR INFORMATION: Key decision over £500k spend/save & impacts more than 2
wards

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 19 March 2026

TITLE: Incentive Funding

Ward(s): Citywide

Officer presenting the report: Shaun Taylor Job title: Head of Highways

Committee Chair: Councillor Ed Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: BCC Staff

Purpose of Report:
1. To seek approval to accept and spend the proposed Incentive funding allocation from West of
England Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA) as part of the City Region Sustainable Transport
Settlement (CRSTS).

Evidence Base
1. The City Region Sustainable Transport Settlement (CRSTS) funding was awarded to MCA in 2024 by
the Department of Transport.
2. This funding replaces previous Transport Block funding streams including Integrated Transport
Block, Highways Capital Maintenance Block and Highways Incentive Block. All works previously
funded by these funding streams need to be delivered using this CRSTS funding.
3. These funds are used primarily for statutory maintenance and replacement projects. This includes
delivering over 300,000sqm of Surface Dressing preventive maintenance and associated Pre-Patch
works that prevents potholes from occurring on the highway. In addition, we have delivered a
number of large patches to removing potholes and defects from the network.
4. A portion of this funding was designated as incentive funding. This funding is subject to local
highway authorities demonstrating that they comply with best practice in highways maintenance,
for example, by spending all the Department for Transport’s capital grant on highways
maintenance and adopting best practice preventative maintenance techniques. Bristol has been
successful in demonstrating these requirements.
5. The incentive funding is dependent on the local authority publishing transparency reports. See
https://www.bristol.gov.uk/residents/streets-travel/road-maintenance/department-for-transport-
funding
6. On the 29th November 2025 the Department for Transport published the Highways maintenance
funding allocations. Highways maintenance funding allocations - GOV.UK
7. The total Incentive Fund announced for MCA region was £7,032,000
Template approved October 25
Page 91
OFFICIAL
8. Bristol’s Incentive fund allocation is £2,467,388
9. Allocation is based on the existing highway maintenance formula which uses the following
weightings:

• A roads: 27.47%
• B and C roads: 27.47%
• U roads: 27.47%
• bridges: 15.39%
• lighting columns: 2.20%

These 5 allocations are then added together to get the total allocation for each authority and
rounded to the nearest £1,000
10. The additional incentive funding allocation was approved at the West of England Combined
Authority Committee and West of England Joint Committee on 30 January 2026.
11. This incentive funding was expected and has been considered as part of highway lifecycle
modelling and budget forecasting. To confirm, this funding is being used in the existing
programme of works for the year.
12. The funding will be used to deliver highway maintenance schemes from the list of projects on its
priority list of roads needing intervention, in line with best practice to ensure the local authority
meets its statutory duties under section 41 of the Highway Act 1980.
13. Highway maintenance works, undertaken to ensure the safety of the travelling public and to
minimise the decline of the network includes:
- Full network condition survey undertaken on every road every year
- Lifecycle modelling to ensure budgets are spent where its needed.
- Inspecting every road and footway every year. Over 1200km of footways and 2500km of
footways.
- Consider and respond to over 1000 enquiries every month.
- Repairing over 4000 potholes last year.
- Surface 20,000 sqm annually - The removal and replacement of the existing surface
- Surface dress 200,000 sqm annually - A layer of aggregate combined with one or more layers
of binder to form a running surface laid over the existing surface.
- Micro-asphalt 30,000 sqm annually - A site-mixed, cold-applied asphalt surface course
- Slurry seal footways 320,000sqm annually - A thin layer of surfacing treatment used to
waterproof the surface, repair minor imperfections, and extend the life of the footway.
- Pre-Patch 30,000 sqm annually - foundation repairs to remove and replace sections of a
carriageway prior to surface dressing

Alternative options considered:
1. Not applicable

Officer Recommendations:
That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:
1. Note the proposed indicative funding allocations of £2,467,388 Incentive funds
2. Authorises the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of
Transport and Connectivity Committee, to take all steps required to accept and spend up to of
£2,467,388 of Incentive funds.
3. Authorise the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of
Template approved October 25
Page 92
OFFICIAL
Transport and Connectivity Committeeto take all steps necessary to procure and award any
contracts (including any contracts over the key decision threshold) necessary to deliver the works
associated with this funding.
4. Authorise the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of
Transport and Connectivity Committee to make reasonable changes to the programme of works
to ensure delivery of the programme, in accordance with the Council’s scheme of financial
delegations.

Corporate Strategy alignment:
1. Aligns with Priority 3: “Creating safe, healthy neighbourhoods and affordable, safe and good
quality homes” by maintaining and upgrading roads, footways, drainage, and street lighting to
ensure safety and accessibility
2. Supports Objective 4.3: “Maintain essential city infrastructure for safety, longevity and
accessibility.”
3. Supports Priority 4: “Making it easier, greener and safer to travel into and around Bristol,” by
enhancing cycling, walking, routes through proactive infrastructure maintenance.

City Benefits:
1. The projects proposed to be delivered using this funding are critical to the success of the council’s
decarbonisation strategy and transport strategy. This investment will ensure that key city transport
assets are appropriately maintained to benefit all users.
2. Due to the type of projects, there may be negative environmental, and equalities impacts that have
to be considered and mitigated, particularly during construction. Mitigations will be sought and
implemented where possible before delivery via scheme-specific Equalities Impact Assessments.
3. Works will be procured the Highways Asset Management and Civils Framework 25-29 which has
social value requirements.

Consultation Details:
1. For maintenance schemes, consultation is often not required as there is no change to the physical
asset being upgraded.

Background Documents:
1. Highways maintenance funding allocations. Highways maintenance funding allocations -
GOV.UK
2. Bristol Highways Transparency Report https://www.bristol.gov.uk/residents/streets-
travel/road-maintenance/department-for-transport-funding

Revenue Cost Source of Revenue
Funding
Capital Cost £2,467,388 Source of Capital Funding Grant funding CRSTS
One off cost ☒ Ongoing cost ☐ Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving? Choose an
item.
OR Income generation proposal ☐

Professional comments section:

1. Finance Advice: The purpose of this report is to note to the Committee for Transport and
Connectivity the proposed indicative funding allocations of £2,467,388 Incentive funds and ask
Template approved October 25
Page 93
OFFICIAL
approval for the Executive Director of Growth and Regeneration to accept and spend the funds in
accordance with the grant requirements.

The total capital cost associated with this proposal is up to£2,467,388. This represents a one-off
expenditure and does not create any ongoing financial commitments for the Council. The capital cost
will be fully funded through grant funding provided under the City Region Sustainable Transport
Settlement (CRSTS) Incentive Fund, allocated by the Department for Transport via the West of
England Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA). There are no direct revenue costs or income
generation proposals linked to this funding. Any ongoing revenue consequences (e.g., inspections,
routine maintenance post intervention) should be contained within existing Highways revenue
budgets.

Drawdown is dependent on MCA’s January 2026 Committee budget paper and confirmation of
allocations; acceptance and spend must comply with any conditions set by MCA and Department for
Transport (DfT). BCC must maintain compliance with DfT’s Incentive requirements—specifically
publication of the Local Highways Maintenance Transparency Report and submission of assurance
documentation per DfT timelines—to avoid loss of incentive funding or clawback.

Finance Business Partner: Vivi Sargioti – Finance Business Partner Growth & Regeneration, 30
December 2025

2. Legal Advice: Any term and conditions attached to acceptance and/or spending of the Incentive
funding should be adhered to avoid default and/or possible clawback. Spending the Incentive
funding should also comply with BCC procurement rules and the Procurement Act 2023.

Legal Team Manager: Anita Kearney, Specialist Lawyer and interim Commercial and Governance
Team Manager (Monday and Friday) – 17 December 2025

3. Implications on IT: I can see no implications on IT arising from these papers.

IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead Enterprise Architect – 18 December 2025

4. HR Advice: There are no HR implications evident

HR Partner: Celia Williams, HR Business Partner, 5 January 2025

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal NO

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) YES

Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment NO

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO
Template approved October 25
Page 94
OFFICIAL
Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

Template approved October 25
Page 95
OFFICIAL
Equality Impact Assessment [version 3.1]

Title: DfT Incentive Fund
Type of proposal: Budget Status: New
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Shaun Taylor
Service Area: Highways Lead Officer role: Head of Highways

Step 1: What do we want to do?

What is the purpose of the proposal?
The proposal is to receive funding from the West of England Combined Authority (WECA) to the value of
£2,467,388 as part of our CRSTS Incentive Fund. This is a high-level EqIA, each scheme and maintenance
programme undertaken using this funding will be subject to individual EqIAs.

Maintenance includes schemes with the objective of maintaining current levels of service. It includes
footway, carriageway, structures, street lighting, and road drainage maintenance, all of which have the
aim of maintaining a safe and accessible highway network for all users. Traffic management includes the
replacement of Urban Traffic Controls and traffic signals where these assets are damaged or at their end
of life. All these projects will involve assessment of existing assets and replacement of damaged or aged
assets. These individual projects will require an EqIA, as the nature of what is to be delivered means that
schemes are a statutory requirement and are determined by the lifecycle of assets. The process by which
assets are prioritised for repair should be assessed separately. There will need to be operationally
focused EqIAs at a scheme level to ensure that schemes are delivered in compliance with equality
requirements, and to assess whether there is likely to be any disruption during works which might have
a disproportionate impact on any groups. We understand that EqIAs should be completed before any
works begin to ensure any negative impacts are identified and mitigated

Who will be affected?
☐ Bristol City Council workforce ☐ Service users ☒ The wider community
☐ Commissioned services ☐ City partners / Stakeholder organisations

Will the proposal have an equality impact?
☐ Yes ☒ No
If ‘Yes’ complete steps 2-4 below. If ‘No’ explain how you know there will be no equality impact:
This EqIA is to accept the funds only. There is no Equalities impact involved in accepting funding,
however all projects will present detailed EqIAs once there are firmer plans/ details in place to deliver
the schemes.

Step 5: Review
Equality and Inclusion Team Review Director Sign-Off:
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

Page 96
OFFICIAL
Date: 19/12/2025 Date: 02/01/2026

Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.

Page 97
OFFICIAL
Environmental Impact Assessment [version 1.2]
Proposal title: Highways Incentive Funding
Assessment type: ☒ Key Decision ☐ Business Case Development
Committee date (if key decision): 03/2026
Project stage and type: ☐ Initial Idea Mandate ☐ Outline Business Case ☐ Full Business Case
Directorate: Growth & Regeneration Assessment author name: Nick Pates

Step 1: Describe the project
1.1 What is the purpose of the proposal?
To accept and spend the proposed £2,467,388 of Incentive funding allocation from West of England Combined
Authority (WECA) as part of the City Region Sustainable Transport Settlement (CRSTS). This funding replaces
previous Transport Block funding streams including Integrated Transport Block, Highways Capital Maintenance
Block and Highways Incentive Block. All works previously funded by these funding streams need to be delivered
using this CRSTS funding.

A portion of this funding was designated as incentive funding. This funding is subject to local highway authorities
demonstrating that they comply with best practice in highways maintenance, for example, by spending all the
Department for Transport’s capital grant on highways maintenance and adopting preventative maintenance.

The incentive funding is dependent on the local authority publishing transparency reports. See
https://www.bristol.gov.uk/residents/streets-travel/road-maintenance/department-for-transport-funding

Allocation is based on the existing highway maintenance formula from the Department of Transport.

This incentive funding was expected and has been considered as part of highway lifecycle modelling and budget
forecasting. The funding will be used to deliver highway maintenance schemes from the list of projects on its
priority list of roads needing intervention, in line with best practice to ensure the local authority meets its
statutory duties under section 41 of the Highway Act 1980.

1.2 Will the proposal have an environmental impact?
The environmental impacts being considered are those that will arise from the decision / business case being
proposed. If you are unsure about how to approach this contact the Environmental Performance Team.

☒ Yes ☐ No
If ‘Yes’ complete steps 2-4 below. If ‘No’ explain how you know there will be no environmental impact:

Step 2: Assess the environmental impacts [complete if ‘Yes’ to an environmental impact]
2.1 Does the proposal create any benefits for the environment, or have any adverse impacts?
Before starting, review the categories below and consider whether or not the proposal creates environmental
impacts in each one, both now and in the future. There is space to describe any cross-cutting issues at the beginning.

Reasonable efforts should be made to quantify impacts wherever possible additional guidance is available on the
Source. It is not recommended to use Copilot to generate assessment details.

Page 98
OFFICIAL
Where the proposal creates beneficial impacts, consider what actions will be committed to by BCC to enhance them.
Where the proposal creates adverse impacts consider what actions will be committed to by BCC to mitigate them.

CROSS CUTTING ISSUES (optional) - highlight any potential issues that are likely to impact multiple categories
Whilst this is approval for funding, the funding will be used on projects that will have an environmental impact.

The environmental impacts of this proposal are on structures and highways maintenance schemes in usage of non-
renewable materials (e.g. concrete and asphalt) and emissions of climate changing gasses. These are statutory
duties to complete, however, so can only be mitigated not fully prevented. Furthermore, if assets are not
maintained, unplanned reactive repair work may be required which could have larger negative impacts than those
associated with planned maintenance works.

The proposals include the following measures to mitigate the impacts: lifetime plans for asset maintenance to
reduce need for reconstruction; long-term council objectives to reduce car usage (and hence need for
maintenance); and scheme level assessments of wildlife and habitat impact during delivery. Further assessment is
not possible at a programme level and will be carried out on a scheme-by-scheme basis.

The net effects of the proposals are a minor negative impact in the short term with an expected positive impact in
the long term, with projects aimed at reducing the long-term carbon costs of reactive maintenance or repairs.

If assets are not maintained their condition will worsen and this could
lead to safety and congestion (worsening air quality) issues.
Climate mitigation:
Becoming carbon neutral Benefits Funding allocated for infrastructure improvements that successfully
encourage active travel will lead to reductions in car journeys
BCC has committed to reducing emissions and air pollution.
becoming carbon neutral for
its direct activities by 2025,
and to support the city in
achieving a Just Transition to
Enhancing
carbon neutrality by 2030. actions

How will the proposal affect
the use of fossil fuels or
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
other energy consuming
activities by BCC, its The delivery of maintenance schemes will increase emissions of
suppliers, or by citizens? climate changing gasses through materials production (embodied
Adverse carbon), installation processes (energy used on site for laying of
Try to provide quantifiable impacts tarmac and machinery), and travel to sites by contractors delivering
information on the the works.
proposal’s activities. The
Env. Performance team can The council’s maintenance team are seeking to monitor direct and
assist with converting this to indirect CO2 from works and are working with contractors to ensure
an assessment of emissions. that materials used are as low carbon as possible, including
Mitigating
actions
consideration to be made for materials to have recycled content. Aim
Further guidance to procure local contractors to reduce travel distance where possible.
☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Page 99
OFFICIAL
Well maintained assets are less subject to adverse effects from
Climate resilience:
extreme weather incidents and can assist with keeping the city
Adapting our services and
moving. This funding may be used to improve drainage assets directly
the city to the changing Benefits
improving the cities resilience to flooding.
climate

Bristol’s climate is already
Review sites within scope of the funding on a case-by-case basis for
changing, and the frequency
opportunities to increase the use of sustainable urban drainage
of extreme weather will
systems (SUDS).
continue to become more Enhancing
likely over time. actions
Review materials performance for resilience to extreme heat and
intense rainfall based on latest projections of Bristol’s climate during
Consider how the proposal
their expected lifetime.
will perform during warmer
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
wetter winters; hotter drier
summers; more intense and None identified
frequent extreme weather.
Adverse
impacts
The proposal should be
designed to reduce the risks
to people and assets from
these changes. The Env.
Performance team can assist
if you are unsure how. Mitigating
actions

Further guidance
☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Nature recovery: None identified
Wildlife and habitats
Benefits
BCC has committed to 30%
of its land being managed
for nature and to halve its
use of pesticides by 2030. Review sites within scope of the funding on a case-by-case basis for
opportunities to increase the use of sustainable urban drainage
Consider how your proposal Enhancing systems (SUDS).
can improve green spaces, actions
retain existing trees, create
new wildlife friendly
habitats, and/or improve Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
wildlife friendly practices Any infrastructure works have the potential to disrupt local wildlife,
and management of green specifics aren’t known at this time at a programme level – individual
spaces. Adverse projects and schemes will undertake the necessary investigations.
impacts
If your proposal will lead to a
reduction in habitat within
Bristol, then consider what Assessment of local wildlife will take place on a scheme-by-scheme
actions can be taken to basis and timing of works arranged to minimise disruption.
deliver a net gain in Mitigating
biodiversity. actions Priority to be given to retention of existing street trees.

Further guidance
☐ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Page 100
OFFICIAL
Waste and circular
economy: Consumption of
resources and handling of Benefits
waste

Bristol aims to become a
zero-waste city.

Consider what resources will Enhancing
actions
be used by the proposal,
how they can be minimised
or swapped for less
impactful ones, where they Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
will be sourced from, and Waste will be generated through repairs/ construction process.
what will happen to any
waste generated. Adverse
impacts
The proposal should be
designed to maximise the
waste hierarchy; from most Contractors to create a waste management plan and follow waste
to least preferable options – hierarchy. Materials will be recycled where possible. We have
reduce/avoid, re-use, recycle, Mitigating commitments in our contracts to minimise waste, with come
incinerate with energy actions contractors committing to 100% of waste not going to landfill.
recovery, dispose via landfill.
Further guidance
☐ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Air quality & pollution Funding allocated for infrastructure improvements that successfully
encourage active travel will lead to reductions in car journeys
prevention: supporting
Benefits reducing emissions and air pollution.
healthy air and minimising
the risk of pollution
incidents

BCC has a statutory duty to
prevent pollution incidents Enhancing
from occurring to land or actions
water, and to improve local
air quality.
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
Internal combustion engines Funding has been allocated for works to take place on bridges, near
and solid-fuel heating waterways, potential for spillages to cause pollution into water ways.
significantly worsen air Adverse
quality which is harmful to impacts Works may create dust and noise pollution.
human health.

Consider what steps will be
When works take place on bridges, contractors to have a full
taken to prevent pollution
emergency spill response plan and equipment in place.
incidents from occurring and
Mitigating
to improve local air quality. actions Contractors are to follow legislation, national guidance and best
practice.
Further guidance
☐ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Page 101
OFFICIAL
Step 3: Commit to actions [complete if ‘Yes’ to an environmental impact]
3.1 Auditable action plan
Use this section summarise and assign responsibility for any actions you have identified during the assessment.
Actions identified in section two can be grouped together if named responsibility is under the same person.
This action plan should be updated at each stage of the project. Please be aware that the Sustainable City and
Climate Change Service will use this action plan as an audit checklist during the project’s implementation or
operation.
Action commitment Responsible Officer Completion date
Ensure contractors follow legislation, best practice and guidance Appropriate project April 2027
manager
Ensure waste management commitments are followed Appropriate project April 2027
manager
Ensure contractors increasingly use low carbon and recycled Nick Pates April 2027
materials, and produce CO2 monitoring reports for works.
Aim to procure local contractors to reduce travel distance where Nick Pates April 2027
possible.
Review sites within scope of the funding on a case by case basis for Nick Pates April 2027
opportunities to increase the use of sustainable urban drainage
systems (SUDS).
Review materials performance for resilience to extreme heat and Nick Pates April 2027
intense rainfall based on latest projections of Bristol’s climate
during their expected lifetime.

Step 4: Send to Environmental Performance Team
Send your assessment to the Environmental Performance Team allowing five working days for comment and
feedback. Assessments will only be signed-off when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers
regarding the environmental impact of the proposal 1.

Step 5: Sign-off - for completion by the Environmental Performance Team
If significant impacts have been identified they will be summarised here by the Environmental Performance Team.

Summary of significant beneficial impacts:
N/A

Summary of significant adverse impacts:
N/A

Submitting Env. Performance
Nick Pates Daniel Shelton
author: Team reviewer:
Date: 19/12/2025 Date: 05/01/2026

1
Review by the Environmental Performance Team confirms there is sufficient information for decision makers to consider the
most relevant environmental impacts at the current stage of the proposal. This is not an endorsement or approval of the
proposal.
Page 102
OFFICIAL
Agenda Item 10

Committee Report

KEY DECISION OR FOR INFORMATION: For Information

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 19 March 2026

TITLE: Workplace Parking Levy Update

Ward(s): Citywide

Officer presenting the report: Adam Crowther Job title: Head of City Transport

Committee Chair: Ed Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: Committee Chair

Purpose of Report:

To update the committee on progress with the Workplace Parking Levy Outline Business Case
(OBC) and to outline progress on key project milestones.

Evidence Base

1. In September 2024, the Transport and Connectivity committee approved up to £1 million for
development of a Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) project, including the OBC, and agreed
to receive further reports once key milestones are met.

2. A Workplace Parking Levy is proposed as part of Bristol City Council’s transport strategy to
reduce congestion and generate revenue for transport improvements. It aims to discourage
car commuting, promote walking, cycling, and public transport, and improve health, the
environment, and land use efficiency.

3. The development of a Workplace Parking Levy scheme involves three key stages; Outline
Business Case (2025–2026), Public Consultation and Full Business Case with approval
(2026–2027), and Implementation and Operation (2028–2029).

4. The OBC programme is currently in progress, with a planned end date of June 2026.

Stage Date Revised date
Supporting studies and April to Sept 2025 Complete
information
Surveys and data collection October to November to early March
November 2025 2026
Modelling, forecasting and November to January March to April 2026
impact assessment 2026
Template approved March 25
Page 103
OFFICIAL
WPL scheme development November to March April to May 2026
2026
WPL package and final OBC January to April 2026 May to June 2026

5. Initial engagement with employer representative groups took place in November and
December 2025 via online webinars and meetings. An online parking survey was sent out
to workplaces via Bristol City Council, Bristol BID, Business West and Visit Bristol. The
survey results will be used to estimate the likely number of Workplace Parking Places
(WPPs) in Bristol. Only those organisations that are estimated to have more than five
workplace parking places were asked to complete the survey as it is not the intention that
smaller businesses would be liable for the WPL if a scheme is taken forward.

6. The programme timeline has been adjusted due to a lower-than-expected response rate to
the initial online parking survey. As the survey forms a critical input to the modelling and
impact assessment work, it was essential to ensure that the data collected was robust,
representative, and sufficiently comprehensive.

7. Following the limited initial response, additional data-collection methods, such as
door-knocking, telephone surveys, and targeted off-street parking audits were undertaken
to supplement the dataset. While these measures have significantly strengthened the
quality and reliability of the information gathered, they required more time to complete than
originally planned. As a result, the surveys and data collection stage extended into early
March 2026, and the subsequent stages of modelling, scheme development, and OBC
preparation were pushed back accordingly.

8. Approximately 570 workplaces have been contacted; this includes schools and colleges
across Bristol. Ninety-two responses were received to the online parking survey, which
includes some of the city’s largest employers such as Bristol University, University
Hospitals Bristol and Weston NHS Foundation Trust and The Bristol Port Company. In
addition, parking data was collected through door-knocking and telephone surveys for a
further 30 businesses. As a follow up to this, off-street parking audits have been
undertaken at approximately 200 key employment locations where data was not attained
through the other data collection methods.

9. The parking data will feed into the modelling, forecasting, and impact assessment work
which is used to predict revenue and assess the likely impacts of a WPL scheme on
congestion, air quality, and economic outcomes. A range of options will be tested and
further engagement with employer groups will occur at this stage. It should be noted that
public consultation is not typically undertaken during the OBC phase so there is no plan for
this.

10. Following the results of the modelling, forecasting and impact assessment, a draft scheme
will be defined, outlining boundaries, charges, space thresholds, exemptions, and operating
hours which will be presented in the final OBC.

11. As part of the OBC, and once a scheme has been defined, it will be possible to set out
what is achievable with the estimated WPL funding. The powers to introduce WPL are
contained in the Transport Act 2000, which enables local authorities to charge for
workplace parking. A WPL is operated through a permit-style licensing scheme where
employers are required to obtain a licence for any liable workplace parking places. By law,
Template approved March 25
Page 104
OFFICIAL
all net revenue raised must be reinvested into improving local transport, after covering
operating costs. Any new WPL must also be approved by the Secretary of State before it
can be implemented.

12. A high-level Investment Strategy for WPL revenue will be drafted; this will be linked with
several workstreams such as the Transport Investment Strategy (TIS) and the Transport
Infrastructure Plan (TIP) that are currently being progressed by the City Transport Team.

13. The TIS will set out Bristol’s transport revenue streams and guide how this funding can be
reinvested to improve transport outcomes. It will provide tools to forecast income, for
example, from parking and bus shelter advertising, and assess the value for money of
broad investment areas such as public transport, cycling, and maintenance.

14. The TIP will provide the overarching framework for how Bristol prioritises and sequences
transport schemes, setting out the city’s strategic transport objectives and the
improvements needed to support housing growth, economic recovery, and sustainable
travel. The TIP summarises and, where necessary, expands on infrastructure
improvements outlined across the suite of documents supporting the Bristol Transport
Strategy and Joint Local Transport Plan 4. It will guide decisions on which schemes should
come forward first by focusing on reliability, reducing congestion, supporting inclusive and
affordable travel options, and making best use of limited street space through prioritising
walking, cycling and public transport. The TIP will be subject to public consultation and will
require committee sign off.

15. The WPL can be positioned as a key mechanism for funding the city’s transport priorities.
While the TIP provides the overarching framework for major capital investment, WPL
revenue can also support the broader transport policy agenda. It could also help unlock
match funding from sources such as the Transforming City Regions Fund, increasing the
value of local investment and enabling a more ambitious programme of improvements than
would otherwise be possible.

16. WPL revenue can also be directed towards priority revenue-funded transport programmes.
These may include measures to improve bus services, such as operational support for the
existing network, enhancements to the passenger experience, and should future policy
development take that direction, work to explore or progress options such as bus
franchising or alternative bus service improvement models permitted under current
legislation. Funding could also support network management functions and transport
behavioural-change initiatives, all of which are essential to improving the performance and
reliability of the wider system.

17. To understand business views on how WPL revenue should be invested, the online parking
survey included a question on preferred transport improvements. The results show that
local bus enhancements are by far the most preferred, with the highest support for
increased frequencies and new routes, followed by reduced bus fares. Cycling
improvements also score strongly, along with support for rail upgrades.

Template approved March 25
Page 105
OFFICIAL
Alternative options considered:

No alternative options are currently recommended as the approach is in line with advice
received from Nottingham City Council who are the only local authority in the country to
successfully implement at WPL so far.

When the project comes to committee for approval at subsequent stages of the programme,
different options will be presented from the modelling.

Officer Recommendations:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity notes this update report.

Corporate Strategy alignment:
1. Children and young people - improved access to transport schemes and initiatives will
help ensure all children and young people have a good start in life.
2. Economy and skills – the scheme will help tackle congestion which can have a significant
negative impact on economic growth. Revenue from a WPL scheme will help ensure
people have improved access to jobs, skills and training.
3. Environment and sustainability – the scheme will help reduce congestion and in turn will
work towards BCC carbon and air quality ambitions. It will also contribute to BCC climate
and ecological emergencies.
4. Healthcare and wellbeing – the scheme will help tackle health inequalities by providing
people with improved access to a range of sustainable transport opportunities such as
walking and cycling that will help improve their health and wellbeing.
5. Homes and communities – the scheme can help increase revenue towards transport
schemes that can provide more healthy, resilient and inclusive neighbourhoods.
6. Transport and connectivity – a WPL can enable investment in a more
reliable, convenient and safer network of public transport and infrastructure for walking and
cycling.
7. Effective development organisation – the project aligns with our One City approach of
working with our partners to deliver long-term ambitions for the city.

Template approved March 25
Page 106
OFFICIAL
City Benefits:

1. The introduction of a WPL has benefits associated with a reduction in car use and
a subsequent increase in the use of alternative modes such as walking, cycling and
public transport. In turn this will have a positive impact on people’s health.
2. A reduction in car trips into the city centre is likely to result in a reduction in the amount
of carbon emissions.
3. A reduction in the number of car trips will have a beneficial impact on air quality.
4. Improved air quality and a reduction in traffic noise will have a beneficial impact on
health.
5. A reduction in car-based trips will help reduce congestion and the negative impacts
associated with this such as delays and the negative impact this has on economic
growth.
6. The greatest potential benefit will be through the transport measures/schemes that can
be funded through the revenue raised by a WPL. The revenue should
be substantial, predictable and locally generated and will significantly help BCC to
develop and deliver transport infrastructure and initiatives in the longer term.
7. The additional revenue generated could fund more sustainable transport options which
are particularly beneficial to younger, older people and disabled people who tend to
have more limited access to a car and rely more on public transport to access key
services such as education and healthcare.

Consultation Details:

1. A WPL is referenced in and consulted on as part of Joint Local Transport Plan 4 and the
Bristol Transport Strategy.
2. A Stakeholder Management Strategy and accompanying Communications Plan form part
of the OBC stage of the work.
3. A Stakeholder Radar has already been produced as part of the Feasibility Study
undertaken by Nottingham CC; this outlines those stakeholders who will be both vital and
necessary to engage and consult with as part of the programme. Further information on
this is outlined from page 38 onwards of the Feasibility Study (see Appendix A).
5. Formal public consultation is proposed as part of Stage Two of the WPL project if it
progresses beyond the OBC stage.
6. Further updates will be brought to the Transport Connectivity Committee as the project
progresses.
7. At the end of the Stage One programme, a proposal will be brought back to the Transport
and Connectivity Policy Committee for approval and to progress to the next stage.

Background Documents:
1. Appendix A: Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol – Final Draft.
2. 12 September 2024 Transport and Connectivity Committee Workplace Parking Levy
report
3. 15 May 2025 Transport and Connectivity Committee Workplace Parking Levy report
4. 23rd October 2025 Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee Workplace Parking Levy
Update Report

Revenue £1 million Source of Revenue Clean Air Zone Fund
Cost Funding

Template approved March 25
Page 107
OFFICIAL
Capital Cost £ Source of Capital
Funding
One off cost ☒ Ongoing Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving? N/A
cost ☐ OR Income generation proposal ☐

Professional comments section:

1. Finance Advice:

The purpose of this report is to update the committee on progress with the Workplace Parking
Levy Outline Business Case (OBC) and to outline progress on key project milestones.

The development of the Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) Outline Business Case (OBC) was
approved with a budget of £1 million, funded through the Clean Air Zone Fund. This allocation
covers supporting studies, surveys, modelling, scheme development, and stakeholder
engagement during the OBC stage. The current expenditure is a one-off cost for the
development of the OBC. There are no ongoing costs identified at this stage.

If the Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) scheme proceeds, it is anticipated to provide a
consistent and locally generated revenue stream. This funding would be dedicated to
improving transport infrastructure and supporting sustainable travel options, helping to
deliver long-term objectives for connectivity and climate action. Future capital requirements
will be considered during the Full Business Case stage, with potential funding sources such
as grants or prudential borrowing.

Finance Business Partner: Vivi Sargioti – Finance Business Partner Growth &
Regeneration, 13 January 2026

2. Legal Advice:

As the purpose of this report is to update the committee on progress, there are no legal
issues associated with this report or its recommendations at this stage.

Legal Team Leader: Dawn Bodill – Specialist Solicitor – Property, Planning and Transport
Team – 5 February 2026 (Team Leader not available).

3. Implications on IT: I can see no implications on IT arising from this report.

IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead Enterprise Architect – 10 February 2026

4. HR Advice: There are no HR implications evident

HR Partner: Celia Williams, HR Business Partner, 24 February 2026

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal YES

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) NO
Template approved March 25
Page 108
OFFICIAL
Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment NO

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

Template approved March 25
Page 109
OFFICIAL
Equality Impact Assessment [version 2.12]
Title: Workplace Parking Levy – Stage One Development and Outline Business Case
☒ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☐ New
☐ Other [please state] ☒ Already exists / review ☐ Changing
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Laura Gosling
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Transport Programme
Manager

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of an Equality Impact Assessment is to assist decision makers in understanding the impact of proposals
as part of their duties under the Equality Act 2010. Detailed guidance to support completion can be found here
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com).
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the process by someone with a good knowledge of the
proposal and service area, and sufficient influence over the proposal. It is good practice to take a team approach to
completing the equality impact assessment. Please contact the Equality and Inclusion Team early for advice and
feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Describe who it is aimed at and the intended aims /
outcomes. Where known also summarise the key actions you plan to undertake. Please use plain English, avoiding
jargon and acronyms. Equality Impact Assessments are viewed by a wide range of people including decision-makers
and the wider public.
The Committee Report outlines Bristol City Council’s proposed approach to developing a Workplace Parking Levy
(WPL) scheme and associated Outline Business Case.

A WPL is an annual charge paid to the Local Transport Authority by employers on the workplace parking spaces
they provide. Employers have the option to pass this cost on to their employees or pay the charge themselves.
The aim is to encourage employers to manage the number of workplace parking spaces they provide, whilst
promoting and encouraging the use of sustainable transport

A WPL forms a potential part of Bristol City Council’s transport strategy and is outlined in Joint Local Transport
Plan 4 and the Bristol Transport Strategy as a key demand management measure aimed at tackling congestion,
particularly at peak times, and as a means of providing significant additional revenue for transport improvements
across the city. The introduction of a WPL would help discourage commuting by car and help increase the use of
alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public transport which would in turn, improve people’s health and
the local environment. A WPL would also provide significant additional revenue for transport improvements
across the city.

The powers to introduce a Workplace Parking Levy are contained in the Transport Act 2000. By law, net proceeds
from a Workplace Parking Levy are only available for the purpose of directly or indirectly facilitating achievement
of local transport policies and objectives.

Further information about the Workplace Parking Levy can be found here: Further information - Bristol Workplace
Parking Levy

Page 110
OFFICIAL
1.2 Who will the proposal have the potential to affect?
☒ Bristol City Council workforce ☒ Service users ☒ The wider community
☒ Commissioned services ☒ City partners / Stakeholder organisations
Additional comments:

1.3 Will the proposal have an equality impact?
Could the proposal affect access levels of representation or participation in a service, or does it have the potential to
change e.g. quality of life: health, education, or standard of living etc.?
If ‘No’ explain why you are sure there will be no equality impact, then skip steps 2-4 and request review by Equality
and Inclusion Team.
If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment, or if you plan to complete the assessment at a later stage please state
this clearly here and request review by the Equality and Inclusion Team.

☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

Step 2: What information do we have?

2.1 What data or evidence is there which tells us who is, or could be affected?
Please use this section to demonstrate an understanding of who could be affected by the proposal. Include general
population data where appropriate, and information about people who will be affected with particular reference to
protected and other relevant characteristics: How we measure equality and diversity (bristol.gov.uk)
Use one row for each evidence source and say which characteristic(s) it relates to. You can include a mix of
qualitative and quantitative data e.g. from national or local research, available data or previous consultations and
engagement activities.
Outline whether there is any over or under representation of equality groups within relevant services - don't forget
to benchmark to the local population where appropriate. Links to available data and reports are here Data, statistics
and intelligence (sharepoint.com). See also: Bristol Open Data (Quality of Life, Census etc.); Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA); Ward Statistical Profiles.

For workforce / management of change proposals you will need to look at the diversity of the affected teams using
available evidence such as HR Analytics: Power BI Reports (sharepoint.com) which shows the diversity profile of
council teams and service areas. Identify any over or under-representation compared with Bristol economically
active citizens for different characteristics. Additional sources of useful workforce evidence include the Employee
Staff Survey Report and Stress Risk Assessment

Data / Evidence Summary of what this tells us
Source
[Include a reference
where known]
Bristol City Council The study undertaken by Atkins in 2011 provided high level estimates of the number of
WPL Feasibility parking spaces that could be encompassed in a WPL scheme based three different defined
Report (2011) areas in Bristol. These range from a lower estimate of 8,600 parking spaces for a smaller
central zone to an upper estimate of 57,000 for a scheme covering the entire city. The
WPL Feasibility Study undertaken by Nottingham City Council in 2021 notes that without

Page 111
OFFICIAL
Data / Evidence Summary of what this tells us
Source
[Include a reference
where known]
undertaking a more detailed and up to date audit of spaces, the accuracy of these figures
is likely to be low.
70.8% of respondents think that air quality and traffic pollution is a problem locally which
Bristol Quality of suggests that there is majority support for initiatives that seek to reduce the impacts of car
Life Survey use in the city.
2024/25
83% of people think that traffic congestion is a problem locally which suggests broad
support for measures that reduce levels of traffic in the city. In the previous years’ survey
this percentage was lower, suggesting local people feel congestion has got worse since
2023.

20.2% of people walk or cycle to work and 14.1% of people take the bus to work which
shows that there is a significant proportion of the population who would benefit from
improvement and investment in active travel and public transport infrastructure.

34.4% of respondents state that they drive to work which suggests, depending on the
coverage of the WPL scheme, that a significant number of people would be impacted by
the proposal.

The Quality of Life survey suggests older people (65 years and older) (28.3%), younger
people (16 to 24 years) (19.1%), Disabled people (27.4%), LGB+ (23.1%) and Trans people
(11.5%) are less likely to drive to work than the Bristol average (34.4%). Carers (42.3%) and
parents (46.4%) are significantly more likely than Bristol average (36.7%) to drive to work.
Those living in the 10% most deprived areas are slightly more likely to drive to work
(37.9%) than the Bristol average.

There are also significant disparities in the extent to which people in Bristol find lack of
transport options prevents them leaving their house when they want to - in particular for
young people, Disabled people, Black Asian and minoritised communities, LGBTQ+, carers
and those living in the most deprived areas.
Age UK: The Future Driving remains the most common form of transport for older people in the UK, with 68%
of Transport in an of households where someone is aged 70+ having their own car.
Ageing Society,
2015
NOMIS Bristol has approximately 18,330 registered businesses with a higher proportion of small
Nomis - Official (10 to 49 employees) and large (250+ employees) employers than the South West regional
Census and Labour average. More work is required to understand the allocation of parking spaces across
Market Statistics these businesses as it is likely that many (particularly among micro and small businesses)
(nomisweb.co.uk) will have no allocated parking and therefore will not be impacted by the scheme.

Travel to Work Bristol’s Travel to Work Survey results reveal that 31% of employees travel to work by car
Survey Bristol, (with an additional 6% car sharing). On average, people driving to work travel in 3.2 days
March 2025 per week and travel an average distance of 35 miles a day. The latter statistic
demonstrates that many commuters are travelling into Bristol from outside of the local
authority boundary and that the WPL will have impacts beyond Bristol.

The survey notes that there is a relatively equal split between men (30%) and women
(32%) who drive to work. (It should be noted that the percentages don’t add up to 100%
because of the option ‘Prefer not to say’)

In line with the Quality of Life Survey, the Travel to Work Survey highlights that people 50+
(39%) are more likely to drive to work than younger people under 30 (21%).
Page 112
OFFICIAL
Data / Evidence Summary of what this tells us
Source
[Include a reference
where known]

The survey identifies that people driving to work are more likely to be from a white ethnic
background (33%) than an ethnic minority group (24%)

Unlike the Quality of Life Survey, the Travel to Work Survey suggests that an almost equal
proportion of Disabled (32%) and non-Disabled people (31%) travel to work by car.

Bristol Walking and The Bristol Walking and Cycling Index, which is updated every 2 years, polls a
Cycling Index representative example of Bristol’s population (circa 1,000 respondents). The survey
(2023) reveals data that would support the aims and objectives of a WPL scheme:

• 49% of people want to walk, wheel or cycle more
• 35% of people want to take public transport more
• 29% of people want to drive less

In addition to the report notes that 64% of people want more investment in walking and
wheeling, 58% more investment in cycling, 83% more investment in public transport and
only 23% more investment in driving.

Global Traffic In 2025, congestion cost the UK economy £11 billion and cost the driver £822.
Scorecard | INRIX
Global Traffic Bristol drivers lost an average of 64 hours each year to congestion, making the city the
Rankings second most congested in the UK, after London (91 hours) and ahead of Leeds (59 hours)
and Manchester (62 hours). This congestion cost the city £191 million and the driver £881
in 2025.
Bristol traffic In 2025, average congestion level was at 51.3%, 3 percentage points higher than in 2024,
report | indicating worsening traffic conditions. During the morning rush hour, this rose to 88.5%
TomTom Traffic and in the evening rush hour, this rose to 87.7%. The average travel time for a 6 mile
Index journey was 25 minutes and 45 seconds, which was 34 seconds more than in 2024. Over
the year, drivers spent 191 hours, or 7 days and 23 hours, in rush hour traffic, which is 4
hours 6 minutes more than in 2024.
Additional comments:

2.2 Do you currently monitor relevant activity by the following protected characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☒ Gender Reassignment
☒ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☒ Pregnancy/Maternity ☒ Race
☒ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☒ Sexual Orientation

2.3 Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
Where there are gaps in the evidence, or you don’t have enough information about some equality groups, include an
equality action to find out in section 4.2 below. This doesn’t mean that you can’t complete the assessment without
the information, but you need to follow up the action and if necessary, review the assessment later. If you are
unable to fill in the gaps, then state this clearly with a justification.
For workforce related proposals all relevant characteristics may not be included in HR diversity reporting (e.g.
pregnancy/maternity). For smaller teams diversity data may be redacted. A high proportion of not known/not
disclosed may require an action to address under-reporting.

A lot of relevant data exists on the commuting habits of Bristol’s residents, but the following gaps remain:
Page 113
OFFICIAL
• Whether different groups currently pay for parking or are offered free parking at their workplace.
• An accurate picture of the number of employee parking bays that may form part of the scheme.
• The ability of employers and employees to meet additional costs.

2.4 How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
You will nearly always need to involve and consult with internal and external stakeholders during your assessment.
The extent of the engagement will depend on the nature of the proposal or change. This should usually include
individuals and groups representing different relevant protected characteristics. Please include details of any
completed engagement and consultation and how representative this had been of Bristol’s diverse communities.
Include the main findings of any engagement and consultation in Section 2.1 above.

If you are managing a workforce change process or restructure please refer to Managing a change process or
restructure (sharepoint.com) for advice on consulting with employees etc. Relevant stakeholders for engagement
about workforce changes may include e.g. staff-led groups and trades unions as well as affected staff.

A Feasibility Study has been undertaken in relation to the WPL scheme. However, this outlines in detail the key
stakeholders that need to be involved and sets out a recommended approach to consulting with them.

Businesses/employers have been engaged with the development of the WPL. A survey was shared with
approximately 570 workplaces, including schools and colleges, between November 2025 and January 2026,
disseminated through the Business Improvement District (BID), Visit West and Business West. Parking data has
been collected through door-knocking and telephone surveys for a further 30 businesses. Around 120 responses
have been collected to gauge, amongst other things, what Bristol’s businesses would like to see WPL revenue
invested in, in the city’s transport system. BCC has also held webinars for employers to ask questions about the
WPL.

Further engagement and consultation is planned as part of the development of this OBC.

2.5 How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
Explain how you will continue to engage with stakeholders throughout the course of planning and delivery. Please
describe where more engagement and consultation is required and set out how you intend to undertake it. Include
any targeted work to seek the views of under-represented groups. If you do not intend to undertake it, please set
out your justification. You can ask the Equality and Inclusion Team for help in targeting particular groups.
The scheme has been subject to an initial Feasibility Study which outlines a Stakeholder Management Strategy for
future stages of project development. This highlights the need for extensive public consultation as well as
delivering a communications plan which sets out how key stakeholders (e.g. employers) will be kept updated and
informed at key stages of the project. The next stage of development will advance the stakeholder strategy and
communication plan, and any scheme will be subject to public consultation and committee sign off before
delivery.

Further engagement with workplaces/businesses will take place in April/May 2026.

Step 3: Who might the proposal impact?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered above and the characteristics protected by the Equality Act 2010.
Also include details of existing issues for particular groups that you are aware of and are seeking to address or
mitigate through this proposal. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying potential impacts etc.
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com)

Page 114
OFFICIAL
3.1 Does the proposal have any potentially adverse impacts on people based on their
protected or other relevant characteristics?
Consider sub-categories and how people with combined characteristics (e.g. young women) might have particular
needs or experience particular kinds of disadvantage.
Where mitigations indicate a follow-on action, include this in the ‘Action Plan’ Section 4.2 below.
GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many groups)
The introduction of a WPL will have a range of impacts for different protected characteristic groups but the full
details of these impacts will not be clear until the necessary development work has been undertaken to
understand the size, scope and pricing strategy of the scheme. Therefore, this EQIA will need to be continuously
reviewed and updated as the project progresses.
A final decision on any WPL scheme will need to be taken by Committee at which point an updated EQIA will be
provided.
The WPL scheme is still at an early stage of development with key details such as pricing, scope and potential
exemptions not yet determined. As such, this EQIA is proportional to the level of detail currently available.
The analysis of the data suggests there is high levels of support for measures that improve conditions for walking,
cycling and public transport and for securing more investment for these modes. Residents want to drive less and
walk, cycle, and use public transport more.
Where certain equality groups may rely more on driving to work due to accessibility or safety barriers on public
transport, this impact may be partially mitigated through investment in public transport infrastructure
improvements.
The scheme is likely to have an impact on a significant number of commuters who drive to work and of that group
it is not unreasonable to suggest that people on lower incomes will likely find it harder to meet additional costs if
their employer passes the cost of the WPL scheme on to them.
The analysis finds that older people make up a greater proportion of people who travel to work by car and
therefore they are more likely to be impacted by the scheme than other groups.
Whilst a levy would be for the employer not the employee, there is a strong possibility that charges would be
passed on directly to employees or the overall number of car parking spaces reduced - so impacts below have
been assessed on that basis.
Disabled people who hold Blue Badges are likely to be exempt, but Disabled employees without a badge and
those with mobility needs could still be affected if parking is reduced. Night and shift workers, who often rely on
cars due to limited public transport at unsocial hours, may also face disproportionate impacts.
In the council’s cumulative equality impact assessment for the 2025-26 Budget, we recognise that increased
charges and levies could disproportionately affect small businesses and the local voluntary and community sector.
This impact is especially significant for organisations led by or supporting equality groups, as higher costs may
prevent smaller providers from continuing to offer equitable services to Bristol’s diverse population. As part of the
feasibility study, we will evaluate potential indirect impacts on specific users and assess whether discretionary
concessions for voluntary and community sector or equality-led stakeholders are appropriate and feasible.
A previous scoping study identified that concessions could be made for specific groups, such as blue badge
holders, small businesses, and NHS facilities etc.
Analysis at this stage is limited to consideration of the direct impact of a levy on employees and has not
considered any potential additional pressure on on-street parking, as the levy would apply to the parking space
itself rather than the vehicle. The project plan includes a study to identify any potential displaced commuter
parking.

PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Younger people are less likely to be reliant on a car to get to work. The reduction in
congestion and re-investment of fees into improved public transport options will
Page 115
OFFICIAL
provide a disproportionate benefit to this group. Improved access to transport schemes
and initiatives will help ensure this group have a good start in life.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Age: Older People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: This group is more likely to be driven to work and as such is likely to be
disproportionately impacted by the proposal if employers decide to pass on costs to
them. That said, the Quality-of-Life survey 2024/25 shows that the number of people
from the 50+ age group that state that they ‘find it difficult to manage financially’ is
much lower than the Bristol average.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: A WPL scheme could potentially have an adverse impact on Disabled employees who
need a car in order to maintain a quality of life and access to employment. A WPL could
also adversely impact a Disabled person who may need to incorporate other tasks into
their commute to work (trip chaining) such as attending necessary appointments in
order to maintain their health.
Mitigations: Consider exception for all Disabled Employees. The Blue Badge scheme may offer
partial mitigations for those Disabled employees who have them, and some employers
may already have designated spaces for Disabled People.
Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Women are statistically more likely to hold caring responsibilities for children and older
adults and would therefore be disproportionately affected if they need to incorporate
other tasks into their commute to work (trip chaining) such as the school run, caring for
or helping with tasks for older adults.
In Bristol there are more Disabled women than men.
Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
employees with caring responsibilities.
Sexual orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Quality of Life survey data suggests a higher than average proportion of LGBTQ+ people
in Bristol find lack of transport options prevents them leaving their house when they
want to.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Pregnancy / Maternity Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: As above, those with caring responsibilities may need to incorporate other tasks into
the commute to work (trip chaining) Pregnant employees may be more dependent on
having their own transport for pre-natal appointments or if they find public transport
inaccessible
Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
pregnant employees.
Gender reassignment Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: Quality of Life survey data suggests a higher than average proportion of LGBTQ+ people
in Bristol find lack of transport options prevents them leaving their house when they
want to.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic households in the UK are more likely to be in deep
poverty and experience higher levels of material deprivation. As such, if employers pass
on WPL scheme costs to these groups they may find it harder to meet these additional
costs.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Religion or Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Belief
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:

Page 116
OFFICIAL
Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
civil partnership
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS
Socio-Economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: The Quality-of-Life Survey suggests that people living in areas of deprivation are slightly
more likely to drive to work than the city average. If employers pass on WPL scheme
costs to these groups they may find it harder to meet these additional costs
Mitigations: See general comments above
Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: As above – those who hold caring responsibilities for children and older adults may
therefore be disproportionately affected if they need to incorporate other tasks into
their commute to work (trip chaining)
Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
employees with caring responsibilities.
Care experienced Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: There is no data to suggest any kind of disproportionate impact on those with this
protected characteristic.
Mitigations:
Other groups [Please add additional rows below to detail the impact for any other relevant groups as appropriate e.g.
asylum seekers and refugees; care experienced; homelessness; armed forces personnel and veterans]
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:

3.2 Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their protected or other
relevant characteristics?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our Public Sector Equality Duty to:
 Eliminate unlawful discrimination for a protected group
 Advance equality of opportunity between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t
 Foster good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t

How people move around the city is intrinsically linked to equality and inclusion. We know that many
protected characteristic groups are more likely to suffer the negative impacts of car use, such as
congestion, poor air quality, traffic accidents and unhealthy physical environments, whilst at the same
time having more limited access and use of vehicles. In addition, we know that these groups are much
more reliant on walking and public transport as a means of accessing work, education, training, and
services. (Transport and inequality: An evidence review for the Department for Transport, NatCen,
2019).

This proposal is in line with the Bristol Transport Strategy that seeks to rebalance the transport system
to ensure that car use is priced fairly compared with walking, cycling and public transport. Cars take up a
disproportionate amount of space on public highway which limits the use of that space for more
investment in sustainable modes of transport (e.g. bike and bus lanes and wider pavements). The
introduction of a WPL has benefits associated with a reduction in car use and a subsequent increase in
the use of alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public transport. By increasing the tariffs
associated with car ownership we may be able to encourage people to re-evaluate the need to own a

Page 117
OFFICIAL
vehicle. A reduction in the number of car trips will have a beneficial impact on air quality. In turn this will
have a positive impact on people’s health.

Step 4: Impact

4.1 How has the equality impact assessment informed or changed the proposal?
What are the main conclusions of this assessment? Use this section to provide an overview of your findings. This
summary can be included in decision pathway reports etc.
If you have identified any significant negative impacts which cannot be mitigated, provide a justification showing
how the proposal is proportionate, necessary, and appropriate despite this.
Summary of significant negative impacts and how they can be mitigated or justified:
Depending on how the scheme is designed the EQIA at this stage has highlighted that there are impacts on various
groups that need to be considered during the development of the business case. This includes potential
disproportionate impacts on Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic groups, older people (50+) and people in social
deprivation.
Summary of positive impacts / opportunities to promote the Public Sector Equality Duty:
Depending on how the scheme is designed there are likely to be a number of benefits for different protected
characteristic groups who often negative impacts of car use – such as congestion, poor air quality, traffic accidents
and unhealthy physical environments, whilst at the same time having more limited access and use of vehicles.

The WPL revenue will be ring-fenced for investment in public transport, walking, and cycling infrastructure, which
can improve accessibility for groups with lower car ownership (e.g., younger people, some older adults, Disabled
people without Blue Badges, and low-income households).

4.2 Action Plan
Use this section to set out any actions you have identified to improve data, mitigate issues, or maximise
opportunities etc. If an action is to meet the needs of a particular protected group please specify this.
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale
To review and update the EQIA through the development of the Laura Gosling Review quarterly
business case and/or key project
milestones

4.3 How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
How will you know if you have been successful? Once the activity has been implemented this equality impact
assessment should be periodically reviewed to make sure your changes have been effective your approach is still
appropriate.
A monitoring and evaluation strategy will be developed for the WPL scheme as part of the proposed business
case.

Step 5: Review
The Equality and Inclusion Team need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your EqIA. EqIAs
should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers on the equalities

Page 118
OFFICIAL
impact of the proposal. Please seek feedback and review from the Equality and Inclusion Team before requesting
sign off from your Director 1.
Equality and Inclusion Team Review: Director Sign-Off:
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

On behalf of A
Hearn
Date: 25/02/2026 Date: 25 February 2026

1
Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.

Page 119
OFFICIAL
Agenda Item 11
Work programme update report

Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee

19 March 2026

Report of: Director: Legal & Democratic Services

Title: Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee work programme update

Officer presenting report: Sam Wilcock, Policy Committee Officer

Recommendation:

1. To note this work programme update.

Page 120
OFFICIAL
Work programme update report

Context/background

1. On 29 January 2026, all 8 Policy Committees engaged in the latest 6 monthly work programme
setting workshop, with a particular focus on the coming 2026/27 municipal year.

2. All Members of Council were invited to the workshop, to ensure an opportunity for cross-party
engagement in reviewing and further developing the Policy Committee work programmes. In
advance of the workshop, all Members and senior officers were given an opportunity to submit new
policy development ideas for consideration.

3. At the workshop, each Policy Committee considered and reviewed the following matters:

- Review of the formal Committee Forward Plans (key decisions due to be taken by Policy
Committees over the next 6-9 months).
- Discussion and review of the new policy development ideas submitted in advance of the workshop.

4. In the interests of transparency and public awareness, this report summarises the outcomes of the
workshop discussion in relation to the Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee:

a. Task and Finish Groups / Working Groups

5. It is noted that the Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee received the closure report of the
Supported Bus Services Task and Finish Group in July 2025.

Task and finish / working groups are established as follows:

6. Parking and Kerbside Strategy Task and Finish Group: this was established in 2024/25 and will
continue in 2026/27.

7. Road Safety Task and Finish Group – Initial work concluded during October 2025 – February 2026
with a closure report to Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee on 19 March 2026.

b. New Policy Development ideas

A number of new policy development ideas were suggested by Members and officers in advance of the
workshop. Each of these were reviewed at the workshop; the outcomes of that discussion in terms of
the work programme are set out below:

8. Size and weight-based charging in RPS areas

Supporting detail: Consideration of a differential charging for vehicles based on larger size/weight or
emissions based.

Page 121
OFFICIAL
Work programme update report

Outcome from workshop: It was noted that initial discussions were due to take place as part of the
Parking & Kerbside Strategy Task and Finish Group. This could result in a commitment to undertake
further policy work outside of the Parking & Kerbside Strategy.

9. Pavement Parking outside of RPS areas

Supporting detail: A challenging topic due to the constrained space available particularly in residential
streets. Any action would be complex and need to be tailored to local need.

Outcome from workshop: Agreed to wait for Government Guidance expected in December 2026. Topic
should return to workshopping session early 2027 with a view to a future scoping paper.

10. Secure Cycle Parking Unit

Supporting detail: With the suggestion of location in the City Centre, this proposal is supported by the
BID team. Any plans for a cycle hub as part of the Galleries development will take time to be developed.

Outcome from workshop:
Officers had started to explore commercial provision of cycle hubs and also are looking at the approach
taken by Glasgow. Budget is not currently assigned so would need further consideration. It was agreed
that a paper should be presented to a Chair’s Briefing (PCCB) for consideration and is now on the
Forward Plan.

11. Annual target for parking space removal

Supporting detail: The consideration of removal of parking spaces is ongoing as part of the
implementation of sustainable transport schemes. This should be considered as part of the Investment
Plan or by the Parking Kerbside Strategy Task and Finish Group.

Outcome from workshop: Topic to be considered as part of the Movement Plan and Transport
Investment Strategy.

12. Cohesive street furniture licensing policy (cross cutting with Licensing Committee, Economy & Skills
and Environment and Sustainability Policy Committees)

Supporting detail: Suggestion of a cohesive policy bringing together licensing, planning and highways to
support businesses seeking outdoor space.

Outcome from workshop: Varying legislative regimes apply and not all premises require the same
licences. Members agreed with the officer proposal for a single webpage to explain the various licenses
that may be required with relevant links. The webpage has been confirmed as Outdoor hospitality:
licences and guidance. This will be further discussed at a joint PCCB and then could be referred to a
Leader and Policy Chairs Group meeting.

Page 122
OFFICIAL
Work programme update report

13. Enhancing Rail Delivery

Supporting detail: Work to strengthen Bristol’s rail network and improve integration with local
transport through strategic planning, partnership working and targeted investment. Improve station
accessibility, safety and active travel connections. Support expansion of local rail services.

Outcome from workshop: It was noted that rail delivery is led by the Mayoral Combined Authority
(MCA). BCC works closely with the MCA on rail projects within Bristol and feeds into the development
of wider rail strategies/ plans for future rail project delivery. The local environment will continue to be
considered when improvements are made to local stations. This is being discussed at a future Chair’s
Briefing (PCCB) or Member Briefing.

14. Value for money road works

Supporting detail: Improving the planning, coordination and delivery of road works across Bristol to
maximise value for money, reduce disruption and ensure efficient use of funds.

Outcome from workshop: Proposal to further develop the prioritisation approach for maintenance.
Officers confirmed that innovation is ongoing to improve coordination and improve efficient use of
resources.

15. Feasibility Study for establishing a municipal bus company.

Supporting detail: The MCA has commissioned additional work to assess the benefits of various bus
reform options. This will include enhanced partnerships, franchising and municipal ownership.

Outcome from workshop: BCC will keep abreast of the proposals and commissioned work of MCA.

16. Review the potential for insourcing of highways maintenance

Supporting detail: Proposal to give consideration to a variety of delivery models for highway
maintenance, including insourcing, prior to the tender of the current framework and maintenance
contract.

Outcome from workshop: The next opportunity to review would be following contract
renewal/consideration. In advance of that, contractors would continue to be held to account. A
Member briefing/ discussion could take place to explore the options available, short and long term, with
view to inform future policy development.

17. Sheffield Stand roll-out to more communities

Supporting detail: Cycle parking is generally implemented as part of scheme delivery and this will
continue with projects. The local transport programme allocates funding for sustainable transport
schemes across local neighbourhoods which is accessed via the Area Committee process.

Page 123
OFFICIAL
Work programme update report

Outcome from workshop: It was requested that a briefing session take place with input from ward
Councillors with regards to where new cycle stands should be located. This will come to a PCCB briefing
with a view it will then go to Area Committees.

18. Equalities: Women in Transport / Digital reporting mechanism for sexual harassment on public
transport

Supporting detail: A project to consider the experiences of women in transport, alongside a review of
equalities aspects such as EQIAs. The task should consider safety as well as a better understanding of
women’s transport needs (e.g. caring responsibilities). This linked to another topic suggestion of a
digital reporting mechanism for sexual harassment on public transport and street-based harassment.

Outcome from workshop: Further information of the proposal was circulated to Policy Committee
members. A scope should be considered to progress options for further policy development, such as a
task and finish group. This is being scoped and, on the committee forward plan for a future decision.
Officers to consider Cllr Edwards written proposal and contact her for further information as necessary.

19: Create highways and transport policy that responds to the vehicle dweller policies (cross cutting
with Homes and Housing Policy Committee)

Supporting detail: Ensure consistent parking control policies that relate to the Vehicle Dweller policies,
both inside and outside of Residents Parking Scheme areas.

Outcome from workshop: There has been a commitment to review the Van Dweller Policy at the agreed
time period following implementation. Transport related elements will also be considered as part of
that review which will be led by the Homes and Housing Delivery Committee.

c. Other issues highlighted at the workshop:

• Residents Parking Schemes
• Wildlife and Safety Lighting
• M32 status and vision
• Workplace Parking Levy

Page 124
OFFICIAL
