Transport Act 2000 - Explanatory Notes 

Skip to main content 
Skip to navigation 
legislation.gov.uk 
https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk Cymraeg 

Home 
Explore our collections 
Research tools 
Help and guidance 
What's new 
About us 
Search Legislation 

Search Legislation
Title: (or keywords in the title) 
Year: 
Number: 
Type: All UK Legislation (excluding originating from the EU) -------------------------------------------- All Legislation (including originating from EU) -------------------------------------------- All Legislation originating from the EU that is amended by the UK -------------------------------------------- All Primary Legislation     UK Public General Acts     UK Local Acts     UK Private and Personal Acts     Acts of the Scottish Parliament     Acts of Senedd Cymru     Acts of the National Assembly for Wales     Measures of the National Assembly for Wales     Church Measures     Acts of the Northern Ireland Assembly     Acts of the Old Scottish Parliament     Acts of the English Parliament     Acts of the Old Irish Parliament     Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Local Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Private and Personal Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Northern Ireland Orders in Council     Measures of the Northern Ireland Assembly     Acts of the Northern Ireland Parliament -------------------------------------------- All Secondary Legislation     UK Statutory Instruments     Welsh Statutory Instruments     Scottish Statutory Instruments     Northern Ireland Statutory Rules     Church Instruments     UK Ministerial Directions     UK Ministerial Orders     UK Statutory Rules and Orders     Northern Ireland Statutory Rules and Orders -------------------------------------------- All Legislation originating from the EU     Regulations originating from the EU     Regulations originating from the EU that are amended by the UK     Decisions originating from the EU     Decisions originating from the EU that are amended by the UK     Directives originating from the EU     European Union Treaties -------------------------------------------- All Draft Legislation     UK Draft Statutory Instruments     Scottish Draft Statutory Instruments     Northern Ireland Draft Statutory Rules -------------------------------------------- All Impact Assessments     UK Impact Assessments 
Search 
Advanced Search 
Transport Act 2000
You are here:
UK Public General Acts 
2000 c. 38 
Explanatory Notes 
Commentary on Sections 
Part Iii: Road User Charging and Workplace Parking Levy 
Chapter II: Workplace Parking Levy

Table of Contents 
Content 
Explanatory Notes 
More Resources 
Open full notes 
Previous 
Explanatory Notes Table of contents 
Next 

Plain View 
Print Options 

Chapter II: Workplace Parking Levy
Sections 178 to 182 
156. Section 178 defines the concept of licensing schemes, and enables licensing schemes to be introduced by a local traffic authority outside London, either singly or jointly with another local traffic authority or authorities or with a London traffic authority or authorities. A licensing scheme is the mechanism for collecting the workplace parking levy. It will be for local authorities to decide whether or not to bring forward a scheme. Section 178 also provides that the occupier of a premises will be responsible for paying charges, but allows the Secretary of State or NAW powers to specify other persons in certain circumstances through regulations. 
157. The occupier of a premises will be required to apply to a local authority for a licence to park up to a stated maximum number of vehicles ("licensed units") at the premises, and pay the appropriate sum based on the charge per unit. Local authorities will be obliged to issue the licence for the number of units requested - they will not be able to use this mechanism as a means of directly controlling the number of parking places the person provides. 
158. Sections 180 to 181 allow licensing schemes to cover any part of the area of the authority or authorities making the scheme, and require that a scheme must be in support of the relevant local transport plan or plans (see paragraphs 108 to 113), or, in the case of a joint scheme involving a London authority the transport strategy prepared and published by the Mayor. 
159. Section 182 provides the detailed definition of workplace parking. The definition is designed to include all forms of parking by those attending premises where they will carry out their work. The parking can be at or in the vicinity of the workplace - this is intended to catch, for example, parking at a car park adjacent to the workplace, but to exclude parking at a park and ride site or station car park, where the worker makes a further journey to reach the workplace. It also is designed to include parking provided by arrangement with a third party - for example where an employer has a contract with a nearby car park company to provide a certain number of spaces for its workforce. 
160. Included in the definition is parking by the employer himself, his employees, suppliers, business customers or visitors, and pupils or students at an educational establishment. Suppliers can mean, for example, a photocopier engineer called out to make repairs, or an external consultant providing advice on site. The definition also includes members of organisations such as a recreational club or Chamber of Commerce, but only when they are engaged in the carrying on of any business of the body. 
   Section 182 also includes a power for the Secretary of State or NAW to change this definition by regulations.  This power is designed to allow the prompt closure of any loopholes which the definition may contain.  It does not provide for the extension of the scope of the levy beyond workplace parking to, for example, customer leisure or retail parking. 
Sections 183 to 185 : Making of licensing schemes
161. Sections 183 to 185 closely follow section 168 to 170 in Chapter I on road user charging, setting out the order-making process for introducing a licensing scheme. 
Sections 186 to 188 : Contents of licensing schemes and licences
162. Section 186 sets out the basic elements which a licensing scheme must contain, and allows for variations in the charges according to different days or times of day, different parts of the licensing area, different classes of motor vehicles or different numbers of licensed units. For example, an authority will be able to choose to apply the levy only to parking during normal office hours on weekdays, to charge different rates for two-wheeled vehicles, or to set a sliding scale so that the charge per vehicle increases or decreases above certain thresholds. 
163. Section 187 mirrors section 172 in Chapter I in granting powers to set exemptions, reduced rates or limits on workplace parking charges by regulations. 
164. Section 188 sets out the essential elements that must be included in a licence under a licensing scheme. Licences may not be granted for a period of greater than one year. 
Sections 189 and 190 : Enforcement of licensing schemes
165. Section 189 largely follows section 173(1) to (3) in Chapter I, in providing for regulations to set out the enforcement requirements for licensing schemes . Subsection ( 3 ) makes the occupier of a premises liable to pay parking levy penalty charges but allows the Secretary of State or NAW to specify other persons in certain circumstances. Subsection ( 4 ) enables the regulations to specify arrangements for adjudication and enforcement of licensing schemes. Section 190 allows for a right of entry to premises by an authorised official to check that workplace parking is appropriately covered by a licence. It also creates an offence of intentionally obstructing an authorised official in the exercise of these powers. 

Previous 
Explanatory Notes Table of contents 
Next 

Back to top 

Options/Help
Print Options
Print The Full Notes
PDF The Full Notes 
Web page The Full Notes 

Print The Whole Division
PDF The Whole Division 
Web page The Whole Division 

Print The Whole Part
PDF The Whole Part 
Web page The Whole Part 

Print This Chapter only
PDF This Chapter only 
Web page This Chapter only 

Explanatory Notes
Text created by the government department responsible for the subject matter of the Act to explain what the Act sets out to achieve and to make the Act accessible to readers who are not legally qualified. Explanatory Notes were introduced in 1999 and accompany all Public Acts except Appropriation, Consolidated Fund, Finance and Consolidation Acts.

More Resources
Access essential accompanying documents and information for this legislation item from this tab. Dependent on the legislation item being viewed this may include:
the original print PDF of the as enacted version that was used for the print copy
lists of changes made by and/or affecting this legislation item
confers power and blanket amendment details
all formats of all associated documents
correction slips
links to related legislation and further information resources

The data on this page is available in the alternative data formats listed: HTML5 alternative version 
HTML snippet alternative version 
PDF alternative version 
XML alternative version 
HTML RDFa alternative version 

New site design 
Help 
About us 
Site map 
Accessibility 
Contact us 
Privacy notice 
Cookies 

All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated . This site additionally contains content derived from EUR-Lex, reused under the terms of the Commission Decision 2011/833/EU on the reuse of documents from the EU institutions. For more information see the EUR-Lex public statement on re-use . 
© Crown and database right
