West of England Bus Strategy
Adopted June 2020
West of England Bus Strategy

2
West of England Bus Strategy

Contents

3
West of England Bus Strategy

Buses matter
The West of England is one of the west. All four local authorities South Gloucestershire, as well
UK’s most successful, innovative and WECA have now declared as neighbouring North Somerset
and desirable places to live and climate emergencies. We need Council. It looks at how bus
work. But our successes bring to work towards ensuring that services could help us to tackle
challenges. Our population is transport is carbon neural by traffic congestion and reduce
growing at a faster rate than 2030. To do this vehicle use carbon emissions at a regional
other city-regions, and so the has to fall substantially. The level.
strain on our transport network answer therefore involves all We want to create a bus network
is growing. And some of our of us using more sustainable, that people want, and are able
residents and communities are types of transport in the future, to use, so that, as we emerge
disconnected from the broader by walking and cycling more and from the Covid-19 pandemic, we
success of the region. using public transport. see a doubling of bus passenger
We undertook a public Promoting zero carbon transport journeys by 2036.
consultation on this bus strategy will mean rethinking how we use Based on passenger research,
in February and March 2020. our existing transport corridors we propose to do this by
Since the Bus Strategy including reallocating road improving the quality and
consultation, the Covid-19 space to buses, pedestrians and reliability of bus services, so
pandemic has changed how cyclists. that people can get to more
people move around the region We need to transform public destinations quickly and
and think about public transport. transport by making it more user comfortably.
We will to consider how travel friendly, affordable, convenient, This strategy sets out some
patterns have changed as a safe and attractive, linking key principles that can help us
result of Covid-19, what that destinations to make sure that increase passenger numbers; as
means for the future, and how everyone can use it. well as a headline programme
to reflect this in the final Bus We want the West of England to for how we plan to achieve it.
Strategy. be a leader in public transport Implementing this strategy will
We are also facing a climate provision. Buses carry more require some difficult choices to
change emergency, and we people with less demand on road be made, both in terms of where
need to urgently reduce space. To ensure buses are not investment is made and changes
carbon emissions, tackle traffic caught in congestion we need to to how roads are used. It will
congestion and improve air provide new infrastructure. It is also require additional funding,
quality. But, over time, our essential that we make progress from both central government
dependency on the private car in the reallocation of road space and through our councils to
to make many of our journeys to more efficient travel choices, make the vision a reality. We
has grown substantially and, ensuring that people can travel also need to work closely with
whilst the real cost of driving around the network safely, operators to make this happen.
has remained broadly the same, efficiently and sustainably.
the cost of catching the bus has The Strategy will be reviewed
The West of England Bus every 18 months years, to
increased. Strategy has been prepared by reflect changing circumstances
The transport sector is the the West of England Combined and ensure that objectives and
largest single source of carbon Authority, working with its targets remain appropriate and
emissions contributing to constituent councils of Bath & ambitious.
climate change in the south North East Somerset, Bristol and

4
West of England Bus Strategy

Setting the scene
Since 1986, bus operators to assume control of the This was an increase of nearly
choose which services to bus network, under certain 40% since 2011/12, compared
run and how frequently they conditions, through a franchising to equivalent city regions
operate (Transport Act 1985). scheme. and represents a significant
Local Authorities can pay bus WECA in partnership with North achievement and a growing
operators to run additional Somerset Council has already market. However, pre lockdown
services on routes that are not consulted on a new Joint Local only about 9% of workers
commercially viable but are Transport Plan (JLTP4). This commute by bus in our area
considered a priority for public Bus Strategy is a supporting which is still significantly lower
funding. document to JLTP4 and reflects than other core city regions.
In 2017, the West of England a shared ambition to reduce In addition, whilst passenger
Combined Authority (WECA) was carbon emissions and provide a numbers have grown, operating
formed to champion the region sustainable transport network. costs have also increased.
and drive clean and inclusive We’ve already taken some very On 25 March the Coronavirus Act
economic growth. positive steps to support bus 2020 led to travel restrictions
In the West of England, bus services in the West of that have dramatically reduced
services are provided by bus passenger journeys. The
England. Over £300m in the last ensuing travel restrictions
operators on a commercial 10 years has been invested in
basis. The councils provide have dramatically reduced bus
bus infrastructure; our councils passenger journeys and reduced
infrastructure such as bus launched the high quality, highly
stops and shelters, timetable the size of the network, and
successful metrobus service; the government has effectively
displays, bus priority measures our councils reallocated road
and real time information underwritten the cost of
space on some of our key routes operating a core network.
screens. Services that are not to buses; we’ve introduced wider
commercially viable, but socially residents’ parking zones to The West of England authorities
necessary, can be funded by the encourage commuters out are working with bus operators
councils. to formulate a recovery plan
of their cars, and we’ve worked for the bus network once travel
WECA now has a number of with the bus operators to ensure
transport functions including restrictions and social distancing
that they are investing in the are relaxed. At the time of writing
information on bus services, quality and environmental
the administration of the (May 2020), the recovery plan is
aspects of their services. work in progress, but is likely to
English national concessionary
travel scheme, co-ordination In the West of England, prior feature a phased re-introduction
of community transport and to the Coronavirus lockdown, of services as passenger levels
paying bus operators to provide we bucked the national trend of start to grow again. However,
non-commercial bus services decline in the use of buses. They the longer term vision, objectives
(this duty is shared with its are the most used form of public and themes in the bus strategy
constituent councils). transport and over 70 million are considered to remain valid,
bus passenger journeys were particularly in the context of the
The West of England Mayor has made in the West of England in need to achieve carbon neutrality
additional powers, including 2018/19. in the transport sector and the
stronger operator partnership critical part that bus services will
arrangements and the ability play in reducing car dependency.

5
West of England Bus Strategy

We still need to improve our Passenger satisfaction, which
bus network and address some is measured independently by What is WECA?
key challenges if we are going Transport Focus has varied year The West of England
to make taking the bus a more to year. Delivering sustained Combined Authority
practical option get more people improvement, based on (WECA) works to drive
onto the bus: passenger priorities is therefore clean economic growth
• Bus services do not provide central to our bus strategy. In that benefits all residents.
a practical option for many the West of England passengers This means supporting
journeys within the region, priorities for improvement our residents to have
either because the destination include; punctuality, improving better skills, more job
is not served by bus, services the frequency and routes served, opportunities and a better
have a low frequency and and the design, comfort and standard of living. As a result
hence are unattractive, condition of the buses. 86% of devolution, significant
different services are not of bus users answering the powers and funding have
co- ordinated and hence survey were satisfied with bus been transferred to our
transfer between services is services in the region. This is region through WECA
not practical, or that services in contrast with the 2019 JLTP4 and the West of England
are slow and unreliable, and consultation, where residents Mayor. Working with our
are perceived as not providing overall felt that bus services councils, Bath & North East
value for money. were not reliable, easy to plan or Somerset, Bristol City and
good value for money. South Gloucestershire, we
• The attractiveness of bus
are making decisions about
travel is also undermined
transport, homes, jobs and
in many cases by poor
skills here in our region,
information, difficult-to-
decisions previously made
understand networks (with
by central Government.
services from different
Although not part of WECA,
operators not always shown
North Somerset Council is
on maps and timetable
recognised as a key partner
information), complex ticket
in meeting the West of
‘offers’ which passengers
England’s transport and
generally cannot use on
housing challenges and is
all buses in their area, and
also included in this plan. By
variable standard of the
working together as a region,
quality of buses and bus stop/
we can achieve so much
waiting facilities.
more.

6
West of England Bus Strategy

Our Vision
Our vision is for bus • For rural areas, whilst the

85.2%
services people can depend bus mode share will remain
on, are quick and reliable, relatively low, an improved
and easy-to-understand
combine to form a simple network will provide a
to understand and easy to practical alternative to the agreed with
use network, are accessible car for many journeys and a
for everyone, are safe and reliable means to accessing
our strategy
comfortable, and offer value services for those without objectives
for money to passengers access to a car.
and to the public purse. • To maximise bus service
reliability and reduce journey
We aim to create a connected times.
region, fit for the future, • To provide simplified ticketing
which will promote active and which allows all bus users to
sustainable travel, improve travel on a single ticket (on
community health and reduce one or more buses), with fares
private vehicle journeys. capped to a daily maximum.
Success in delivering this vision • Accessible passenger waiting
will mean more travel by bus, facilities and vehicles, and
less reliance on car travel, which better integration with other
is essential to achieving the modes.
West of England’s economic,
environmental and quality of life • Address congestion and
ambitions. delays due to car travel by
attracting car users to use
To realise our vision this buses for some or all of their
Strategy seeks to achieve the journeys.
following:
• Continue to improve
• A comprehensive and joined- passengers satisfaction with
up bus network which bus services and their value
maximises the range of for money.
journeys able to be made by
bus, thereby improving access
to key employment, health
and leisure destinations for
everyone.
• A doubling in bus passenger
numbers by 2036.

7
West of England Bus Strategy

• Reduce overall emissions

76%
due to general road traffic by
persuading car drivers
to travel by bus, and by
improving the bus fleet to
agreed with the low or zero emission buses.
concept of an Maximise service quality,
in terms of vehicle comfort
interchange-based and ease of boarding and
network alighting, reliable and real-
time information, and an
attractive, safe and accessible
bus stop environment.
• Improve the public domain
through the reduction in car
traffic and transfer of highway
space to buses, bicycles and
pedestrians.
• Better access to places for
public transport, and better
design for bus services in new
developments.
• To increase the proportion
of bus passengers satisfied
or very satisfied with bus
services overall.
Achieving these outcomes will
require the delivery of some
key improvements, many of
which will require challenging
decisions.

8
West of England Bus Strategy

Bus Strategy
A well-designed network that is simple,
coherent and efficient across the region

Autumn 2019 However, journey times and network more efficient. Core
reliability are severely affected urban routes would reduce in
Prior to the Coronavirus by traffic congestion, and as number but could operate at
pandemic the West of England a consequence most routes high frequencies of every 5-6
bus network covered a wide area in Bristol and Bath terminate minutes, and where possible
with urban, inter-urban and rural in the city centres rather than run as cross-city services to
services. Many of the main bus cross the city, to mitigate the increase the range of direct
routes in the urban areas had impact of traffic congestion destinations. Establishing a
service frequencies of at least on either side of the centres. small number of frequent orbital
every ten minutes throughout Despite recent progress, bus services (by rationalising and
the day. The key inter-urban lanes can be discontinuous or combining existing services)
corridors generally had service not practical in some places would effectively provide a better
frequencies of at least every half- where they are needed. Also, integrated network of radial and
hour in the daytime. However, there are competing demands orbital routes. Well-designed
there are gaps in the coverage of for limited road space on many neighbourhood bus interchanges
the network, which can make it key radial roads (such as parking would then provide safe and
difficult to travel by bus to more and loading for adjacent shops). easy-to-use transfer locations
outlying employment and retail Bus priorities and parking for journeys which require use of
centres. Also, bus services to restrictions also require effective more than one bus. Rationalising
rural areas tend to be infrequent enforcement. the number of services could
and indirect because of the need result in some passengers
to serve a dispersed population. Future network design needing to walk further to their
A high proportion of travellers There is potential to change nearest stop. The scale and
use the bus on our core how the network is provided to impact will need to be carefully
corridors, comparable with enable new journey opportunities considered in any network
other equivalent city regions. for passengers and make the redesign.

Current network Future network

D C

B
Central Central Central
area hub area

High frequency services mainly Cross-city high frequency services
terminating in the central area

Orbital high frequency services
A

9
West of England Bus Strategy

Better interchange Most interchanges would be

48%
accommodated on existing roads,
A co-ordinated and unified bus
by moving bus stops closer
network would significantly
together, providing good walking
increase the range of different
routes between them and better
places which people could travel
would be prepared to by bus.
signing and information.
to walk further This principle has been followed
An interchange-based
approach will require a major
to a better, more in a number of European cities
improvement in bus service
and particular features of a
reliable bus service network structured around
reliability for cross-city services
to function effectively. At
interchange could include:
present, bus operators strike a
• The co-ordination of services balance between the operational
to function together as a efficiency of cross-city operation
network - including the (which removes the need for
reintroduction of cross-city layover and use of road space
service operation and a for bus stands) and the risk of
‘cross-subsidised’ network transferring delays occurring
approach (where routes that on one side of a city centre to
cover their costs would help bus routes on the other side.
support those that don’t). Effective operation of an efficient
• Upgrade to the quality of the cross-city bus network will be
facilities, information and reliant on new bus lanes and
branding. other bus priority measures
along the route corridors and
• The new network to be used in the city centres. This is likely
by passengers as a network, to require further, substantial
via interchange. transfer of road space to bus
• Careful consideration of city services with some sensitive
centre’s bus routes and bus decisions to be made around
stopping arrangements. parking/loading provision and
general traffic access on key
radial routes.

Central area or interchange

10
West of England Bus Strategy

Park & Ride importance of access for school stages of a bus-based rapid
age people, whose options may transit network, known as
New and existing Park & Ride
be otherwise limited. The long metrobus. Metrobus offers
services will be reviewed in
terms benefits of getting young faster, limited stop journeys,
the context of their role in the
people familiar with the bus with an emphasis on quality and
wider network, considering low
network is both good for building reliability including where
frequency stopping patterns
independence and a society possible the provision of
on route, similar to the rapid
where sustainable travel options segregated operation.
transit principles adopted by the
are the norm.
metrobus network. Providing Mass transit
Park & Ride services remain Longer distance coach The West of England Combined
a key element of the transport travel Authority has also commenced
strategy for the region, closely the assessment of a proposed
linked to the management and The strategy is to improve the
connectivity of these services as Mass Transit network for the
pricing of parking spaces within city region. Covering four
our key centres. Bus based part of our wider network. The
growth of scheduled inter urban corridors from Bristol city
Park & Ride will be the core centre to Bath, Bristol Airport,
of this provision, with a high coach travel has seen significant
growth in the last 10 years, and and Bristol’s North and East
frequency offer on key radial Fringes, the routes will feature a
routes into our towns and cities. they play an important role in
reducing longer car journeys, high capacity, limited stop, and
Existing sites will be expanded physically-segregated public
and new sites provided These as well as making connections
to other major transport hubs, transport mode, of a bus-based,
sites will be designed to fit the tram or metro specification, for
emerging strategic network, and such as Bristol Airport. These
services require their own completion over the next twenty
operate as transfer locations years. The network will
for connecting bus services and stopping facilities,that have good
connections with the local bus integrate with the background
key interchanges between other bus network which will be
transport modes. Historically, networks to ensure that coherent
and simple end to end journeys adjusted to fully integrate with
bus based Park & Ride has the new network.
provided non-stop journeys from can be provided.
the sites to the City Centres.
metrobus Bath
School services Through the JLTP4 we propose Bus passenger journeys in Bath
to expand the metrobus network. grew rapidly from 2012 to 2019
The strategy will include the and per capita bus use in Bath
investigation of the opportunity Metrobus will continue to be
promoted as a separate arm and North East Somerset is in
to extend concessionary travel to the top ten of places in the UK.
those in education or training. A of the bus network, but will
comprehensive network needs be closely integrated with However, the combination of
to ensure that it considers background bus services limited radial corridors, narrow
the requirements of travel including shared ticketing and roads and pinch points means
to education and training. An dual use of certain stops and that relatively minor incidents
interchange based network will interchanges. In 2019, as part on the highway can give rise
by its nature provide increased of a £235 million infrastructure
opportunity for travel but it investment, the West of England
should be designed to reflect the authorities completed the first

11
West of England Bus Strategy

to significant traffic congestion Transformational
and so bus services are prone Opportunities Delivery
to unpredictable and lengthy The changes to the network
delays. Bus punctuality in Bath Funding for bus operation has
historically been limited, coming will be delivered over the
remains stubbornly below coming years, to ensure
the target set by the Traffic largely from ticket sales revenue.
that it continues to deliver
Commissioner – despite the To meet our targets for bus use for existing passengers. The
introduction of various bus and provide services which are effectiveness of the network
priority measures and access a more practical “turn up and will depend on the delivery of
controls. More bus priority go” travel option would require measures that can promote
measures will be needed on the significant extra funding from the service punctuality. Bus
radial corridors and in Bath city West of England authorities. Priority measures, as well
centre to recreate the conditions as other policy decisions
If funding were to be available,
under which bus operators can will be delivered along
this would enable a more
meet the punctuality target public transport corridors
transformational network
consistently and re-establish through a jointly managed
to be provided, combining
cross-city links with confidence. infrastructure programme.
principles around interchange
Installing new bus priority
and integration with higher Stages for delivery are:
measures may not be easy or
frequencies. It would also enable
uncontroversial though. • Discuss and refine
a more comprehensive route
Bath Bus Station, and Dorchester network to be provided in those network design with
Street alongside it, are the focus urban areas away from the main operators
of the majority of bus services in roads and in rural areas. WECA • Complementary policy
Bath and interchange with train and its constituent Councils implementation
services at Bath Spa station is will investigate the funding
• Identify and design bus
very good. The sheer number of opportunities and sources
priority measures
buses passing along Dorchester that could support a more
Street – over 40 per hour each transformational network. • Identify and upgrade
way at times – can make it an a phased hierarchy of
intimidating environment for Interchange locations
pedestrians who have to cross • Production of operating
it to walk from the Bus and Rail framework documentation
Stations to the city centre and
shopping areas. There is scope • Engagement and
for creating interchanges at consultation
termini on the end of the city • Phased construction
centre.
• Phased introduction of
new network

12
West of England Bus Strategy

Bus Strategy
Better services for people in rural areas

Accessibility for rural hour, or every 2 or 3 hours

80%
communities is critical, including – according to the service
the provision of bus services demand).
to enable access to jobs and • Build interchange into the way
education, as well as leisure and the inter-urban bus services
retail destinations. are arranged: The number agreed that rural
Consistent with the national of destinations available via communities could
picture, services to rural areas inter-urban bus services will
have been reliant on funding be significantly increased if be better served
from councils because operators interchange opportunities with by connections
are generally unable to operate other bus services and rail
them on a commercial basis. services are encouraged. The to transfer
Pressure on council budgets timetables of services should hubs
continues to increase which thus be specifically designed
affects their ability to keep these to ensure that passengers
services going with taxpayers’ are able to transfer to other
services.

82%
money.
Rural and inter-urban services • `Transfer Hubs’: Inter-urban
will inevitably have much less services should connect
frequency than urban services with a small number of key
interchanges/transfer hubs
and hence attracting passengers
to use these services will en-route to the central areas agreed that we
require measures which rely of Bristol and Bath – such should explore
as peripheral shopping
less on frequency and more on
providing an easy-to-understand centres, Park & Ride sites, other transport
and consistent network. We need and other major public solutions to serve
destination points. Peripheral
to get rural services
transfer hubs will also serve rural communities
to operate more effectively,
whilst increasing the number
as locations where low- rather than
frequency rural services
of destinations available to can operate as feeders into conventional bus
passengers. Options include: longer-distance inter-urban services
• Some rationalisation of services.
services to provide more • Inter-urban and other rural
consistent routes, consistent services should aim for
start and end points, and operating hours which align
easy-to-understand clock- well with other urban services
face departure time - to aid they connect to – to ensure
passenger understanding i.e. that, for example, passengers
a service always operates are not left ‘high and dry’ at a
the same route and leaves transfer hub in late evening.
a bus stop at the same time
past each hour (or every half

13
West of England Bus Strategy

With a network of inter-urban
services between peripheral
towns and Bristol or Bath, and
with well-defined transfer hubs,
it will be feasible to operate
lower frequency rural services
which meet with other services
at these hubs – to allow rural
services to maximise their
frequency without needing to
enter congested central areas.
A rural/inter-urban network
with a small number of ‘hubs’
in towns and other destination
points, could also be connected
by demand responsive and
community transport services
(discussed further on in this The availability of transfer
document). These transfer trips opportunities should be Delivery
would offer a means for rural highlighted through improved Changes to the rural bus
and village inhabitants to reach information/mapping e.g. network will need to be
key services such as hospitals on- shelter signage, on-board undertaken carefully and
and shopping centres by bus. automated announcements, and in a phased manner. The
Inter-urban services could be waiting facilities (e.g. shelter) next stage will be to identify
operated as a mix of ‘express’ should be provided at all suitable locations for transfer
and ‘local stop’ services along interchange points, to maximise hubs and discuss the concept
similar routes. Local stop the convenience and comfort of further with bus operators
services would divert from main transferring passengers. over the next two years. The
roads into local communities, The network options need to authorities will then prepare
and selected local services include a detailed assessment outline specifications and
could operate to and from Park of their impact on rural designs, and clarify funding
and Ride sites on the edge of communities. This may include arrangements.
Bristol or Bath – allowing these recommendations on more Existing rural bus services
services to operate at higher rural services and funding already funded by the
frequency than they could if they opportunities. authorities will also be
travelled into the central area, reviewed as part of this
and also allowing passengers approach to improve their
to be the able to take advantage accessibility for passengers
of frequent ‘bus priority’ Park & and value for money.
Ride services into the city centre.

14
West of England Bus Strategy

Bus Strategy
Giving passengers more reliable and faster buses
through priority infrastructure and wider policy

Delivering punctual bus services numbers. Our councils will

84%
that make the bus an option review policies on car parks and
that passengers can rely on on-street parking, to encourage
is at the heart of this strategy. use of alternative modes to the
Improved bus priority measures, car as well as improving bus
such as bus lanes and bus-only service reliability. agree with the re-
roads, will play a critical role
in the successful remodelling
Going further, our JLTP has allocation of road
already highlighted that the
of the network and improving delivery of traffic restraint space in favour of
reliability. In particular, the
provision of cross-city services
mechanisms such as congestion buses to ensure
charging and a workplace
will be dependent on a package parking levy would increase the services run
of new, effective and well-
enforced bus priorities to operate
number of people taking the bus punctually
or train, or cycling as well as
punctually. greatly assisting in the funding of
We plan to invest heavily in more frequent services and bus
such measures. In some places priority infrastructure.
this will require challenging New housing estates also
decisions around parking,

76%
need to be carefully designed
loading and through traffic to ensure that bus routes are
movement (such as reserving fully accessible and prioritised
part of a corridor for buses and over general traffic. Key routes
cyclists, and diverting through- need to be wide enough for two
traffic onto an alternative route). buses to pass without disruption
agree with
Delivery of schemes on and unencumbered by parked diverting traffic
the highway can impact on vehicles. Public transport
bus operation during their information should be promoted
away from certain
construction. These works, and to maximise bus mode share, public transport
any other highway works, need and where possible routes
to be carefully managed by the provided at an early stage of
corridors
local authorities to ensure that the development to encourage
bus services are not negatively sustainable travel habits.
impacted during the construction The adoption of this Bus Strategy
period. containing key principles and
Wider transport and planning our vision for the region, helps
policies will continue to have to support the role of the
a significant influence on local planning authorities in
bus passenger numbers. In challenging developers to bring
particular, the management forward these types of solutions.
and pricing of parking provision
will directly impact on people’s
tendency to use the bus and
our ability to grow passenger

15
West of England Bus Strategy

The provision of a

81%
comprehensive network, and Delivery
the infrastructure required to The delivery of bus priority
support its operation will still infrastructure will be
require significant financial undertaken in a phased manner,
support from the West of with initial identification and agreed that buses
England authorities. Raising
additional local income
design to be undertaken over should have extra
the next two years. This will
will involve some joined up includea systematic review of ‘green time’ at
thinking and maybe a change
in priorities in some parts of
each bus corridor to identify traffic signals to
existing congestion hot spots,
the West of England in terms and refine measures for help services run
of the way that we view our
highway and public transport
segregation or priority of buses. punctually
networks. This will be followed by the
identification and allocation
Our Joint Local Transport of funding for the delivery of
Plan provides more detail bus priority schemes and their
about potential local funding phased rollout of infrastructure
options and steps that packages up to 2026/27.
could help to support and
encourage public transport Alongside this, the authorities
usage. will review parking policy
across the area to clarify its
impacts on bus passenger
numbers and where appropriate
amend restrictions to encourage
sustainable travel patterns. The
planning authorities will also
further embed good working
practices and standards in the
outline design of new housing
and employment developments
to improve public transport
accessibility and reliability to
and through these areas.
The Joint Local Transport
Plan also highlights the need
to consider traffic constraint
measures that could generate
funding for investment into bus
services and other sustainable
transport interventions.

16
West of England Bus Strategy

Bus Strategy
Simple, smart and convenient ticketing

Improving value for money The large growth in the Integration of payments and
is key for both passengers availability of smart phones ticketing across bus operators
and those that don’t currently and development of contactless will be essential to ensure
choose to use the bus. Smart payments has transformed the seamless operation of the
payments and ticketing that can the wider retail sector and network. Whilst there are some
automatically choose the best are driving changes in fare integrated tickets, they are
value fare will play a crucial payments. Whilst this has limited in both their range and
role in improving the passenger already begun to move the attractiveness. The strategy is
experience and growing bus sector away from on-bus cash to develop smarter payments
passenger numbers. Convenient payments there is no consistent and ticketing options. This will
ticketing arrangements can cashless payment or mobile provide a consistent customer
reduce bus boarding times, ticket offer across bus operators offer across all buses. that
speed up journeys and increase resulting in the continued need is easily available and well
access to public transport in the for cash and different apps for promoted. It could also ensure
area and is already the norm in different bus operators. that passengers are not unfairly
many urban areas. impacted by using the proposed
‘interchange’ network.

17
West of England Bus Strategy

The simplicity of ticketing and

82%
payments in areas such as
London, where customers do not
need to purchase a ticket before
travel and are charged the best
value fare based on the journeys agree with our
they are made, are often viewed
as the ideal that should be
ticketing principles
aspired to.
While the London model would
be challenging to replicate in
a deregulated bus market, the
West of England will work with
other city regions to learn from
• Customers only needing 1
and share best practice.
account/1 app for bus tickets,
The West of England’s aspiration payment, journey planning,
for ticketing and payments is and real time information
to provide a consistent, high across the area.
quality, and coherent offer where
• The ability for customers
customers have convenient
without contactless bank
purchasing opportunities and
cards or smart phones to
and it is trusted to charge the
be able to access the same
best value fares.
benefits (e.g. children and
As a principle smart payments people without a bank
and ticketing should include: account).
• Tickets and payments • Integrated with public
using the latest contactless transport modes (e.g. Rail/
technology. Ferry ) to enable seamless
• The same experience on all travel.
buses.
• A Pay-As-You-Go system
automatically charging the
best fare available with daily
and weekly caps.

18
West of England Bus Strategy

Bus Strategy
High quality, consistent and easily understood information

People need clear and accessible • Customers should be able to
service information to give them access information anywhere Delivery
confidence in using bus services. and personalise it to meet The authorities will develop
Providing a single accessible their needs. a specific Bus Information
place for clear, comprehensive • To provide real-time strategy for the West of
and reliable information on travel information on services and England and continue
options is essential for achieving alerts on disruption and to maintain and develop
seamless door-to-door journeys. service changes. Travelwest as the foundation
It provides people for public transport
• To use customer insight
information.
with the confidence to travel by and information to improve
public transport and active travel performance and reliability of
modes, particularly for journeys information systems and bus
made less regularly. It will also services.
help to overcome misconceptions • To improve access to
relating to service frequency, passenger transport
fares and journey times by information by making data
public transport, bicycle or foot. openly available in formats
We will further use our existing that can be utilised by third
Travelwest website as the parties.
foundation for public transport
information across the West of • To develop with bus operators
England. the value and scope of social
media in public transport
Information needs to be available information
in advance of the journey, as well
as being updated regularly ‘on
the move’.
We will prepare a Bus
Information Strategy to develop
proposals in more detail but
will be based on the following
principles:
• Customers are able to easily
access high quality, accurate
and impartial information
which is simple to use.
• Bus information meets the
needs of existing passengers
as well as encouraging
new passengers to use bus
services.

19
West of England Bus Strategy

Bus Strategy
A safe, pleasant and comfortable customer experience

We have worked closely Improving trust with the bus
with Transport Focus, the companies, value for money
independent passenger group, and offering facilities such as
on this strategy. WIFi can greatly improve young
The group’s annual survey people’s perception and capture
looks at passenger satisfaction a future market that will use
and priorities, comparing bus buses in years to come.
services across the country. In some parts of our region, the
The 2019 survey shows that survey reports a lower standard
86% of current bus users are of passenger experience than
satisfied with services, as others, due to varying facilities at
illustrated below. The key areas bus stops and the quality of the
for improvement in the West buses on some routes.
of England are: bus service We recognise the views of
punctuality; journey time and passengers represented in this
value for money. annual survey and we have
The survey also shows that been working hard with bus
other factors such as on-bus operators to make changes.
environment and comfort; the This has led to some significant
bus driver, and the timeliness improvements, raising standards
of the journey, are important to and expectations.
passengers in our region. We know that there is still
In some cases, the perception room for improvement, and
of bus travel is poor. Of those will continue to work with
who don’t currently use buses, operators on ways of improving
particularly young adults, issues a passenger’s whole journey.
around feeling uncomfortable
in a possibly unwelcoming
environment may put them off.

Overall satisfaction

86%
Value for money

50%
Punctuality

68%
Journey time

80%
20
West of England Bus Strategy

The strategy will aim to focus on
improving various aspects of the Delivery
end to end passenger journey, • Upgrade of bus stop
including the following: infrastructure
• Passenger safety both at the • Develop a gold standard
bus stop and on bus through for drivers in the West
provision of CCTV. of England with all bus
• Driver training – we recognise operators
from Transport Focus surveys • Identify and develop plans
that a good bus journey can for improved accessibility
significantly affect overall to bus stops
passenger satisfaction.
We propose to work with • Annual review of
operators to build on the Transport Focus Bus
quality and success we’ve Passenger Survey
seen from schemes like to identify areas for
metrobus and look to develop improvement
a gold standard for drivers in
the West of England.
• Enhanced facilities such as
Wi- Fi and USB charging.
• Accessibility to and from bus
stops - improving the direct
walking routes.
• Well laid out stopping facilities
with generous weather
protection, lighting and
information.
The continuing development and
delivery of the strategy will seek
to reflect the ongoing results and
passenger priorities evidenced
in the Transport Focus Bus
Passenger Survey.

21
West of England Bus Strategy

Bus Strategy
Modern, clean and accessible buses that contribute
to reducing transport’s harmful emissions

Buses can carry many more case for bringing forward fleet

61%
people than a single car reducing investment.
the number of cars being used It should be emphasised that
to go into city centres and buses, by their very nature, are
polluted urban areas. But it is part of the solution in tackling
important to reinforce their role congestion and reducing car feel that modern
as part of the solution to air
quality issues by ensuring buses
dependency, thereby improving vehicles are
air quality.
have as near as possible zero important to the
tailpipe emissions in the West of Also, new buses emit far lower
England. tailpipe emissions than those passenger
Investment in high quality
they replace. In the West experience
of England we have made
buses will play a crucial role significant progress in reducing
in the successful delivery of vehicle emissions, such as
the Bus Strategy. Modern, through the use of biofuel for the
clean vehicles help increase metrobus and East Bristol fleets
passenger numbers through a and hybrid vehicles on Bath Park
Delivery
more pleasant and comfortable & Ride services. Operators will progressively
journey experience, as well bring forward fleet
as the provision of on board Fleet investment will
investment alongside the
facilities like WiFi and USB therefore play a significant
infrastructure investment
charging points. Although there role in improving air quality
which will help support the
is significant upfront investment, and meeting the air quality
commercial case for the new
they can also reduce operator thresholds with in Bath and
vehicles. The authorities will
costs through better fuel Bristol city centres as part of the
also work with operators to
efficiency, and assist with the Clean Air Zones.
clarify funding opportunities
promotion of the network. to further reduce tailpipe
The changes to the West of emissions and progress
England bus network being bio-gas and electric fleet
considered as part of this investment.
strategy may require an increase The councils are separately
in the overall fleet size, driver progressing Clean Air Zones
numbers and depot capacity. It in Bath and Bristol. Depot
will be important to make this capacity will be increased
change a positive one for air with the councils assessing
quality in the West of England potential new locations for
and to provide a positive depots, including potential
contribution to the strategy new facilities at park and ride
objectives. sites.
Increased passenger
numbers, bus lanes and other
infrastructure will play a key role
in supporting the commercial

22
West of England Bus Strategy

Bus Strategy
A network complemented by Community and Demand Responsive Transport

Community transport Community transport operations

66%
encompasses a range of in rural areas are faced with the
transport services - such as same dilemma that rural bus
`Dial-a-Ride’, community-owned operators face, i.e. the sparsity
buses, group minibus hire of population and dispersed
schemes and voluntary car nature of settlements give rise to are open to using
schemes – that supplement higher operating costs and lower
commercial public transport revenue than urban operations.
a shared taxi/mini
services. Most community Another well-established form bus to connect to
transport is demand-responsive
and offers door-to-door transport
of demand-responsive transport the wider network
is a shared taxi scheme, under
for people who have signed up which travel in specific areas
to be members of the schemes. can be co-ordinated and tailored
It relies heavily on volunteers more to specific needs than is
and is predominantly focussed possible with a fixed bus route.
on local communities. Most The growth in app-based taxi
schemes were set up as local booking creates tremendous
initiatives to meet local transport opportunities for expanding
needs. the role of shared taxi services Delivery
There is no legal duty on local in urban and rural areas -
authorities to support community although trials so far have not The authorities will develop
transport, but it is widely generated the volume necessary a specific Community
recognised that the sector plays for a sustainable commercial and Demand Responsive
a vital role in helping people to operation. transport strategy. This
live independently and play an will explore innovation
We will continue to support in delivery of Demand
active part in community life – and encourage community and
particularly those who find it Responsive Transport and
demand-responsive transport develop the role of this
difficult to access mainstream schemes, working with providers
public transport. Local sector to complement the
and the voluntary sector to bus network. The authorities
authorities provide guidance, improve information and
assistance and funding to will work with providers
facilities, and to co-ordinate to develop and coordinate
schemes, but administration service provision. Subject to
and service delivery are carried services, and identify funding
funding, we will support new opportunities to develop
out by the schemes themselves. initiatives that make use of
Local and central government access to transfer hubs and
emerging technologies to interchanges.
can also make grants available develop community and demand-
occasionally for new vehicles. responsive transport.
In addition, community-owned
buses can operate scheduled
bus services within the scope
of regulations that protect
commercial operations.

23
West of England Bus Strategy

Operational framework
Bus services in the West of The West of England Mayor and
England, as for the rest of Great North Somerset Council have The highest
Britain outside London, are new powers to franchise local bus
largely provided by operators on services. Franchising effectively ranked priorities
a commercial basis. To date, we means that the authorities would for supported bus
have used existing legislation specify routes, frequencies and
to improve the quality of bus ticketing arrangements, and invite services are access
services, through formal and tenders from operators to provide to employment,
informal partnership approaches. them. Franchising can take a
Initiatives such as the metrobus number of forms in relation to hospitals and
Quality Partnership Scheme bus and could be used to address education.
(QPS) where maximum fares specific issues or focus on
and minimum frequencies can particular areas. The experience
be specified by the councils, and to date of some authorities
where a very high quality bar was considering franchising is that it
set for the vehicle specification. presents a number of challenges
Subsequent legislation (the 2017 including cost which would have
Bus Services Act) has provided to be evaluated before initiating
further opportunities to increase this strategy.
the Councils’ influence on local This would be similar to the
bus service operation standards. way bus services are provided
An area-based, statutory in London, and would have to
partnership, where the councils be subject to an appraisal, and
would invest in improved facilities a consultation, demonstrating
along bus routes, as well as other that this would be the best way
measures such as increasing to deliver improvements to the
parking charges. The scope of network.
required operator contribution It is important to emphasise
can increase further to include that franchising, of itself, will not
(for example) smart ticketing. An generate new services, lower
AQPS would last for at least five fares or greater reliability. These
years. issues are delivered through
An Enhanced Partnership investment in the bus network.
Scheme goes further by not Franchising could, however,
requiring local authorities to lead to greater network stability,
provide further facilities. Councils although this may require more
can also prescribe further subsidy and the need to raise
requirements around information, additional funding. In other
branding and ticketing. words, it is important to be clear
what the problem is that we are
trying to solve before deciding
that franchising is the best way to
solve it.

24
West of England Bus Strategy

But with or without franchising
a network, the need to subsidise Delivery
some bus services will remain. Since the Bus Strategy • Seek to maintain a core
These are services which don’t consultation, the Covid-19 strategic public transport
make a profit but are considered pandemic has changed network linking residential
socially necessary. how people move around areas with employment
We are considering what the region and think about sites and local services
services need to be provided in public transport. We will to • Enable disadvantage groups
the future, against a backdrop consider how travel patterns and communities to access
of limited funding. This has have changed as a result of employment sites and key
historically included a mix of the Covid-19, what that means for local services.
following: the future, and how to reflect
this in the final Bus Strategy. • Impact on carbon emissions
• Park and Ride services; or air quality
which have the ability to In determining which services
intercept large numbers of car to financially supports we will • Reduction in traffic
journeys. consider we will prioritise congestion
services based on a range of • Offers significant
• Demand Responsive and
criteria including: interchange opportunities
Community Transport; which
have the ability to support • Supports new and existing onto bus and/or rail
accessibility issues for employment, especially in network including major
individuals at comparatively Enterprise Areas transport hubs
lower costs. • Supports new housing • No, or little, alternative to
• Local shopping services; (occupied in the last 3 travel by sustainable means
which can support local years), especially affordable • Access for disabled persons
communities and help housing
individuals to support
themselves in their homes.
• Services to Hospitals; which
• Rural services; which improve help improve access to
accessibility and reduce rural healthcare and reduce the
isolation. need for supported hospital
• Access to education; reducing transport.
the need to travel by car or • Access to employment
providing support to younger opportunities; which can
adults who would otherwise help particularly in areas
struggle to access higher of high unemployment or
education. where travel is highlighted
• Evening and Sunday services; as a particular barrier to
which increase access to employment.
entertainment and leisure
opportunities or can support
weekend or shift workers.

25
West of England Bus Strategy

Delivery Programme
The delivery of the themes
set out in this strategy will
be undertaken in a carefully Recovery Plan and achieve pre-lockdown passenger levels
phased manner, integrating the
delivery of infrastructure with Discuss and refine network designs with operators, for both urban and rural a
progressive and complementary
Complementary policy development and implementation
changes to routes and
frequencies. A strategic Identify and design bus priority measures
programme is shown below.
Identify and upgrade a phased hierarchy of Interchange locations
Close engagement with, and
investment by, bus operators Production of operating framework documentation
will be a key feature of the
programme, alongside an initial Phased construction
recovery plan to get back to Confirm and prioritise revenue funding sources and revenue raising opportuni
passenger levels experienced
before the Covid-19 lockdown, Vehicle investment by operators
which itself may take some time.
Identify new / expanded depot capacity
Community and Demand Responsive Transport Strategy
Phased introduction of new network

26
West of England Bus Strategy

2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25 2025/26 2026/27 2027/28

areas

ities

27
West of England Bus Strategy

28
