Committee Report

KEY DECISION OR FOR INFORMATION: For Information

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 15 May 2025

TITLE: Workplace Parking Levy Update

Ward(s): Citywide

Officer presenting the report: Adam Crowther Job title: Head of City Transport

Committee Chair: Cllr Ed Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: Committee Chair

Purpose of Report:

To report for information on the Workplace Parking Levy project, to help the committee understand
the key milestones for the Stage One development and Outline Business Case (OBC) of the project.

Evidence Base

1. In September 2024, the Transport and Connectivity Committee approved to spend up to
£1million on the Stage One development of a Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) project including
preparation of an OBC. It was agreed this would be funded from Clean Air Zone revenue
funding.

2. The introduction of a WPL forms a potential part of Bristol City Council’s transport strategy and
is outlined in Joint Local Transport Plan 4 and the Bristol Transport Strategy as a key demand
management measure aimed at tackling congestion, particularly at peak times, and as a means
of providing significant additional revenue for transport improvements across the city. The
introduction of a WPL would help discourage car commuting and help increase the use of
alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public transport which would in turn, improve
people’s health and the local environment.

3. A WPL is an annual charge paid to the Local Transport Authority by employers on the workplace
parking spaces they provide. Employers have the option to pass this cost on to their employees
or pay the charge themselves. The aim is to encourage employers to manage the number of
workplace parking spaces they provide, whilst promoting and encouraging the use of
sustainable transport.

Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
4. The powers to introduce a Workplace Parking Levy are contained in the Transport Act 2000. By
law, net proceeds from a Workplace Parking Levy are only available for the purpose of directly
or indirectly facilitating achievement of local transport policies and objectives.

5. The only UK local authority to have implemented a WPL so far is Nottingham City Council. The
Nottingham scheme came into effect in April 2012 and so far, it has generated a significant
amount of revenue for transport schemes in Nottingham (£103 million up to 2024). This has
helped pay for extensions to their tram network, maintaining and improving bus services and
redevelopment of Nottingham railway station. The annual cost per workplace parking space in
Nottingham has been set at £570 for the financial year 2025/26.

6. In the past two years, both Leicester City Council and Edinburgh City Council have progressed to
the OBC stage of a WPL scheme, but both have recently dropped their proposals, due to issues
relating to the cost-of-living crisis and mixed local support. However, other local authorities
such as Oxfordshire County Council and Glasgow are still pursuing plans for a WPL.

7. A WPL Scoping Study was first carried out by Atkins in 2011 to help identify the type of scheme
that might be most appropriate for Bristol and to allow the costs and benefits to be better
understood. At the time, it was estimated that there were approximately 8,600 – 9,500
workplace parking spaces in the ‘central core’ of Bristol. Subsequent discussions took place
regarding WPL at BCC, but no firm actions were taken until 2021, when Nottingham City
Council were commissioned to carry out a Feasibility Study to help advise how a scheme could
be developed and delivered in Bristol.

8. Nottingham CC provided a ‘WPL Route Map’ in their Feasibility Study in order for BCC to
successfully implement a WPL. This consisted of three main stages:

• Stage One: Scheme Development and Outline Business Case
• Stage Two: Public Consultation, Final Business Case (FBC), and Scheme Approval (for
submission to the Secretary of State for Transport)
• Stage Three: Implementation and Operation

9. The Stage One proposal has been reviewed by officers in detail and incorporated into a
recommended approach and outline Project Plan for undertaking Stage One. At this initial
stage, it is estimated that the length of time it would take to complete Stage One is a year.
However, this will be dependent on procurement and commissioning timescales and further
consideration of the consultation requirements throughout the programme. The proposed
programme would be split into five key workstreams which are as follows:

1. Supporting studies and information (April to June 2025)
2. Surveys and data collection (June to September 2025)
3. Modelling, forecasting and Impact Assessments (September to November 2025)
4. WPL scheme development (October 2025 – March 2026)
5. WPL package and final OBC (December 2025 to April 2026).

10. The main tasks that need to be undertaken in each of these five workstreams are as follows:

11. Supporting studies and information:

Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
• Commissioning and utilisation of relevant studies and modelling to create a foundation
to justify introducing a WPL scheme; these studies need to identify the extent of the
problem that the WPL is seeking to address. The findings should be used to inform the
production of an OBC.
• Assess the need to commission new studies where information is out of date.
12. Surveys and data collection:
a) Up to date, robust quantitative and qualitative data needed is needed to assess the
proposed scope and impacts of a WPL scheme.
b) An Off-Street Parking Audit/survey will be required to understand the “make-up” of
employers to estimate the number Workplace Parking Places (WPPs). This can be linked
to other council data sources to ensure all known employers are captured.
c) Engage businesses to ensure we have robust data; this will require initial WPL scheme
principles to be established before engagement with businesses takes place e.g. scope
of the proposed charging area and estimated charge per space.
13. Modelling and Forecasting:
• The focus of the modelling should be on the financial, transport, environmental and
economic impacts of a WPL, although there may be other modelling considerations.
• Modelling should illustrate how the WPL could operate and fund future transport
projects.
14. Scheme Development:
• Key elements of the scheme need to be developed and appraised at this stage. e.g.
applying discounts to certain types or sizes of employers. The likely impacts of the WPL
must be clearly set out.
• Stakeholder Engagement – BCC needs a thorough understanding of the future transport
infrastructure ‘asks’ of businesses for WPL to be acceptable.
• Undertake an initial displaced parking study to identify any potential displacement of
commuter parking as a result of a WPL.
• Draft a WPL Scheme Order; it should be noted that this is classified as a Licensing
Scheme rather than a Traffic Regulation Order.
15. WPL Package and Outline Business Case:
• A WPL Package will be funded from the revenue generated. An outline of the transport
package must be set out. There will be crucial project interdependencies at this stage
with the BCC Transport Investment Strategy and Transport and Movement Strategy
which are both currently in development.
• The OBC should outline how much the WPL Package will cost to implement and how it
will be funded.
• Development of a business support programme should be established to assist and
support employers in preparing for the introduction of the WPL scheme.
• The outputs from the delivery of the five Stage One workstreams will form the basis for
BCC to formally progress to Stage Two and commit the necessary resources and budgets
to advance the scheme.

16. Work on the Supporting Studies and Information workstream has already begun and officers
have initiated the procurement process to secure a consultant who is able to advise and assist

Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
with the survey and data collection work required, as well as leading on the Modelling and
Forecasting workstream.
Alternative options considered:

No alternative options are currently recommended as the approach is in line with advice received from
Nottingham City Council who are the only local authority in the country to successfully implement at
WPL so far.

Officer Recommendations:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity notes this update report.

Corporate Strategy alignment:

1. Children and young people - improved access to transport schemes and initiatives will help ensure
all children and young people have a good start in life.
2. Economy and skills – the scheme will help tackle congestion which can have a significant negative
impact on economic growth. Revenue from a WPL scheme will help ensure people have improved
access to jobs, skills and training.
3. Environment and sustainability – the scheme will help reduce congestion and in turn will work
towards BCC carbon and air quality ambitions. It will also contribute to BCC climate and ecological
emergencies.
4. Healthcare and wellbeing – the scheme will help tackle health inequalities by providing people
with improved access to a range of sustainable transport opportunities such as walking and cycling
that will help improve their health and wellbeing.
5. Homes and communities – the scheme can help increase revenue towards transport schemes that
can provide more healthy, resilient and inclusive neighbourhoods.
6. Transport and connectivity – a WPL can enable investment in a more reliable, convenient and
safer network of public transport and infrastructure for walking and cycling.
7. Effective development organisation – the project aligns with our One City approach of working
with our partners to deliver long-term ambitions for the city.

City Benefits:

1. The introduction of a WPL has benefits associated with a reduction in car use and a subsequent
increase in the use of alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public transport. In turn this
will have a positive impact on people’s health.
2. A reduction in car trips into the city centre is likely to result in a reduction in the amount of carbon
emissions.
3. A reduction in the number of car trips will have a beneficial impact on air quality.
4. Improved air quality and a reduction in traffic noise will have a beneficial impact on health.
5. A reduction in car-based trips will help reduce congestion and the negative impacts associated with
this such as delays and the negative impact this has on economic growth.
6. The greatest potential benefit will be through the transport measures/schemes that can be funded
through the revenue raised by a WPL. The revenue should be substantial, predictable and locally
generated and will significantly help BCC to develop and deliver transport infrastructure and
initiatives in the longer term.

Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
7. The additional revenue generated could fund more sustainable transport options which are
particularly beneficial to younger, older people and disabled people who tend to have more limited
access to a car and rely more on public transport to access key services such as education and
healthcare.

Consultation Details:

1. A WPL is referenced in and consulted on as part of Joint Local Transport Plan 4 and the Bristol
Transport Strategy.
2. A Stakeholder Management Strategy and accompanying Communications Plan form a key part of the
Stage One work.
3. A Stakeholder Radar has already been produced as part of the Feasibility Study undertaken by
Nottingham CC; this outlines those stakeholders who will be both vital and necessary to engage and
consult with as part of the programme. Further information on this is outlined from page 38 onwards
of the Feasibility Study (see Appendix A).
4. Following approval of this report, a more detailed project plan will be produced which will further
outline the stages at which consultation will take place throughout the programme.
5. Formal public consultation is proposed as part of Stage Two of the WPL project if it progresses
beyond the OBC stage.
6. Further updates will be brought to the Transport Connectivity Committee as the project progresses.
7. At the end of the Stage One programme, a proposal will be brought to one of the following:
a. Full council debate
b. Golden Motion
c. Budget amendment

Background Documents:

1. Appendix A: Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol – Final Draft.
2. 12 September 2024 Transport and Connectivity Committee Workplace Parking Levy report

Revenue Cost £1m Source of Revenue Clean Air Zone
Funding
Capital Cost £ Source of Capital Funding
One off cost ☒ Ongoing cost ☐ Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving? N/A
OR Income generation proposal ☒

Professional comments section:

1. Finance Advice: This report updates the Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee on progress
with the Workplace Parking Levy. The development of the proposal is being funded with Clean Air
Zone revenue, of which £1m is currently set aside for this purpose. The forecast costs of developing
a Workplace Parking Levy will need to be assessed in the context of the available funding. A more
detailed income projection will also need to be developed so the council can assess the cost:benefit.

Finance Business Partner: Ben Hegarty, Finance Business Partner Growth and Regeneration, 27
March 2025.

2. Legal Advice: There are no specific legal implications arising from this update report
Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
3. Legal Team Leader: Joanne Mansfield 1 April 2025

4. Implications on IT: I can see no implications on IT regarding this activity.
IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead Enterprise Architect – 28 March 2025
5. HR Advice: There are no HR implications evident.
HR Partner: Niki Rodgers, Growth and Regeneration HR Manager – 2 April 2025

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal YES

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) NO

Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment NO

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
