Agenda for Joint meeting - West of England Combined Authority Committee and West of England Joint Committee on Friday, 5th June, 2026, 1.00 pm - Modern Council 

Skip to main content 

Section menu 

Calendar 

Committee information 

Constitution 

Decisions 

Officer decisions 

Forward plans 

Library 

Meetings 

Search documents 

Subscribe to updates 

What's New 

Return to main site 

Home 
Agenda and decisions 

Agenda and decisions

Joint meeting - West of England Combined Authority Committee and West of England Joint Committee - Friday, 5th June, 2026 1.00 pm 

Attendance details 

Agenda frontsheet 
PDF 116 KB 

Agenda reports pack 

Comments from the Overview & Scrutiny Committee PDF 102 KB 

Comments from the Audit Committee PDF 54 KB 

Statements PDF 445 KB 

Public Questions and Mayor's Responses PDF 279 KB 

Petitions and Mayor's Responses PDF 142 KB 

Printed decisions 
PDF 86 KB 

Venue: 70 Redcliff Street (BS1 6AL)

Media

Items 

No. 
Item 

1.

Welcome & Apologies for Absence

To receive apologies for absence from Members and notification 
of substitutes. 

2.

Declarations of interest under the Localism Act 2011

Members who consider that they have an interest to declare are 
asked to state: 

a) The item number in which they have an interest; 

b) The nature of the interest, and; 

c) Whether the interest is a disclosable pecuniary interest, 
non-disclosable pecuniary interest or non-pecuniary 
interest. 

  

Any Member who is unsure about the above should seek advice from 
the Monitoring Officer prior to the meeting in order to expedite 
matters at the meeting itself. 

3.

Minutes PDF 154 KB 

To consider and approve the minutes of the West of England 
Combined Authority Committee meeting held on 27 March 
2026. 

4.

Chair's Announcements

To receive any 
announcements from the Chair of the West of England Combined 
Authority Committee. 

5.

Items from the Public PDF 272 KB 

WRITTEN PUBLIC QUESTIONS 

  

1. Any member of the public can submit a maximum of 
two written questions in advance of this meeting. 

  

2. The deadline for the submission of questions is 
5.00pm, at least 3 clear working days ahead of a meeting. For this 
meeting, the deadline for questions is  5.00pm on Monday 1 
June 2026 . 

  

3. Questions should be addressed to the Chair of 
the meeting and e-mailed to  democratic.services@westofengland-ca.gov.uk . 

  

4. Under the direction of the Chair, wherever 
possible, written replies to questions will be sent to questioners 
by the end of the working day prior to the meeting. 

  

5. Please note - under the Combined 
Authority’s committee procedures, there is no opportunity for 
oral supplementary questions to be asked at committee 
meetings. 

  

6. The written questions and replies will be 
circulated to committee members in advance of the meeting and 
published on the Combined Authority website. 

  

PUBLIC STATEMENTS 

  

1. Any member of the public may submit a written 
statement (or petition) to this meeting. 

  

2. Please note that one statement per individual is 
permitted. 

  

3. Statements must be submitted in writing and 
received by the deadline of 12 noon on the working day before the 
meeting. For this meeting, the deadline for statements 
is  12 noon on Thursday 4 June 2026.  Statements 
should be emailed to  democratic.services@westofengland-ca.gov.uk . 

  

4. Statements will be listed for the meeting in the 
order of receipt. All statements will be sent to committee members 
in advance of the meeting and published on the Combined Authority 
website. 

  

5.  Please note : If any member of 
the public wishes to attend the meeting to orally present their 
statement, they are asked please to notify the Combined 
Authority’s Democratic Services team of this at the point 
when their statement is submitted and by 12noon on the working day 
before the meeting at the very latest. 

  

6. For those presenting their statements at the 
meeting, up to 3 minutes ‘speaking time’ is permitted 
for each statement. The total time available for the public session 
at this meeting is 30 minutes. 

  

Additional documents:

FINAL - Public Questions and Mayor's Responses , item 5. 
PDF 168 KB 

FINAL - Petitions and Mayor's Responses , item 5. 
PDF 105 KB 

6.

Comments from the West of England Combined Authority Overview & Scrutiny Committee PDF 48 KB 

To receive comments from the 
Chair (or Chair’s representative) on behalf of the Combined 
Authority’s Overview & Scrutiny Committee. 

7.

Comments from the West of England Combined Authority Audit Committee PDF 22 KB 

To receive comments from the 
Chair (or Chair’s representative) on behalf of the Combined 
Authority’s Audit Committee. 

8.

Mayoral Combined Authority and Mayoral Budget Outturn 2025/26 PDF 704 KB 

This report 
represents the revenue and capital outturn for the West of England 
Mayoral Combined Authority Committee for the financial year 2025/26 
based on data from the period April 2025 to March 2026 for both the 
West of England Mayoral Combined Authority and Mayoral budgets.

Decision:

Committee noted the 
Outturn position for the West of England Mayoral Combined Authority 
Revenue Budget as set out in Figure 1 including reserves, the 
outturn position for the Mayoral Revenue Budget as set out in 
Figure 12, the Capital Outturn as set out in Figure 10 and the 
Treasury Outturn as set out in Appendix 9.

9.

Investment Fund Programme and Grant Assurance PDF 300 KB 

To update on the overall Investment Fund (IF) 
programme and headroom.

Decision:

That the West of England 
Combined Authority Committee: 

  

(1)    
Delegated the authority to the West of England 
Combined Authority Director of Place, in consultation with 
equivalent Directors from the Unitary Authorities, to approve the 
Full Business Case for the Distribution Hub once a suitable site 
has been identified. In the event of a consensus not being reached 
at Director level, decision making to be escalated to the West of 
England Mayoral Combined Authority Chief Executive Officer (CEO) in 
consultation with the Unitary Authority CEOs; 

  

(2)    
Allocated £5m of Investment Fund capital to 
create a Nature Recovery Fund; 

  

(3)    
Noted the intended receipt of the indicative 
allocation of £868,500 of Funding for Local Remediation 
Acceleration Plans revenue grant and noted that the receipt of the 
funding and acceptance of any terms and conditions accompanying the 
funding was subject to the final approval of the MCA’s 
Section 73 officer exercising her delegations under the 
Constitution; 

  

(4)    
Delegated the finalisation of the detail of the 
allocation and use of the Local Remediation Acceleration Plans 
funding, within the parameters of the grant conditions, to the West 
of England Mayoral Combined Authority Director of Place in 
consultation with the equivalent Directors from the Unitary 
Authorities. In the event of a consensus not being reached at 
Director level, decision making to be escalated to the West of 
England MCA’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO) in consultation 
with the Unitary Authority CEOs; 

  

(5)    
Noted the intended receipt of an indicative 
allocation of £200k of revenue funding from Homes 
England’s Markets, Partners and Places Directorate for 
2026/27 and noted that the receipt of the funding and acceptance of 
any terms and conditions accompanying the funding would be subject 
to the final approval of the MCA’s Section 73 officer 
exercising her delegations under the Constitution; 

  

(6)    
Delegated the finalisation of the detail of the 
allocation and use of the £200k funding, together with future 
awards of Homes England funding to support the Strategic Place 
Partnership, within the parameters of the grant conditions, to the 
West of England Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA) Director of Homes 
and Regeneration in consultation with the Directors of Place of the 
Unitary Authorities. In the event of a consensus not being reached 
at Director level, decision making to be escalated to the West of 
England MCA’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO) in consultation 
with the Unitary Authority CEOs; 

  

(7)    
Delegated authority to the West of England Mayoral 
Combined Authority Executive Director of Transport, in consultation 
with the Unitary Authority Directors of Infrastructure, to enter 
into a grant funding agreement with First Bus through the Zero 
Emission Buses Regional Areas (ZEBRA2) award. In the event of a 
consensus not being reached at Director level, decision making to 
be escalated to the West of England Mayoral Combined 
Authority’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO) in consultation 
with the Unitary Authority CEOs; 

  

(8)    
Noted the updated work programme to utilise the Zero 
Emission Transport City (ZETC) funding, as set out in paragraph 
31; 

  

(9)    
Delegated oversight of the ZTEC funding to the 
 ...  
view the full decision text for item 9. 

10.

Delivery Assurance PDF 224 KB 

To consider changes to schemes within the 
Investment Fund programme against the agreed delivery assurance 
principles.

Decision:

The West of England 
Combined Authority Committee:

 

(1)    
Approved the change requests for schemes within the current 
Investment

Fund programme as set out 
in Appendix 1;

 

(2)    
Agreed the flexibility to allow the West of England Combined 
Authority, Bath & North East Somerset Council, Bristol City 
Council and South Gloucestershire Council to move CRSTS risk 
budgets between CRSTS projects within their respective CRSTS 
programmes, subject to the criteria set out in paragraphs 5 and 6 
in this report.

11.

Forward Plan of Regional Strategic Work PDF 119 KB 

To receive a 
forward plan of regional strategic work outlining upcoming strategy 
launches, development activity and new programmes expected to begin 
in the next period. Forward plans are received at each meeting of 
the Committee (as required).

Decision:

That Committee noted the forward plan provided 
in this paper and provided steers on priorities and the direction 
of the work areas it contained.

12.

West of England Investment Plan PDF 127 KB 

This 
report sets out the 2026 Investment Plan that the West of England 
will pursue to deliver economic growth, improve lives of people 
across the region and achieve the ambitions set out within the 
Growth Strategy. This provides an annual statement of the ongoing 
programme of activity that will be brought forwards. 

  

The 
report seeks Committee approval of the Investment Plan. 

  

The 
report also draws Committee’s attention to the Investment 
Prospectus. 

Additional documents:

Item 12A - Appendix Investment Plan 2026 , item 12. 
PDF 2 MB 

Item 12B - Appendix Investment Prospectus 2026 , item 12. 
PDF 6 MB 

Decision:

That the West of 
England Combined Authority Committee:

 

(1)    
Approved the West of England Combined Authority Investment Plan 
2026 (attached at Appendix 1);

 

(2)    
Noted the publication of the West of England Investment Prospectus 
(attached at Appendix 2)

13.

Skills Strategy PDF 130 KB 

The report seeks Committee approval for the 
West of England Skills Strategy.

Additional documents:

Item 13A - West of England Skills Strategy , item 13. 
PDF 6 MB 

Decision:

Committee approved the West of England Skills 
Strategy (attached at Appendix 1).

14.

Established Mayoral Strategic Authority Status PDF 158 KB 

This 
report sets out proposals for WECA to make a formal application for 
Established Mayoral Strategic Authority status which, if 
successful, would unlock the highest levels of devolution currently 
available in England. 

Decision:

Committee supported 
the Mayor’s intention to make a formal application to 
Government for WECA to progress to Established Mayoral Strategic 
Authority (EMSA) status.

15.

Expansion of the West Of England Combined Authority PDF 128 KB 

To seek Committee 
support for the Mayor consenting to the submission of the formal 
proposal to expand the West of England Combined Authority to 
include North Somerset Council. In line with Government guidance, 
this decision now represents the final local consent point for the 
proposed expansion.

Additional documents:

Item 15a - Appendix 1 ns_consultation_full_findings_report_v1.0 , item 15. 
PDF 2 MB 

Item 15b - Appendix 2 North Somerset Expansion Proposal_v2 , item 15. 
PDF 972 KB 

Decision:

The West of England Combined Authority 
Committee:

 

(1)    
Supported the Mayor’s intention to consent to the submission 
of a formal proposal to expand the West of England Combined 
Authority (WECA) to incorporate North Somerset Council, noting that 
under the English Devolution and Community Empowerment Act 2026 
(the ‘Devolution Act’), this would be the final consent 
point for the expansion of an Authority;

 

(2)    
Delegated the authority to the Director of Law and Governance 
(Monitoring Officer) in consultation with the Unitary Monitoring 
Officers to approve the wording of the final draft order for the 
expansion of the MCA to be laid before parliament.

16.

Brabazon and West Innovation Arc New Town PDF 498 KB 

To provide an update to the West of England 
Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA) Committee on MHCLG’s new 
towns programme, and to secure Committee approval on plans to 
establish a Mayoral Development Zone and joint delivery team to 
drive forward work on the Brabazon and West Innovation Arc new town 
proposal.

Decision:

That the West of England Combined Authority 
Committee:

 

(1)    
Approved the non-statutory designation of the West Innovation Arc 
as a Mayoral Development Zone (MDZ);

 

(2)    
Approved the key principles of the Mayoral Development Zone set out 
in paragraph 11;

 

(3)    
Endorsed the establishment of an interim delivery team to 
coordinate activities and facilitate early progress for the West 
Innovation Arc (WIA) project;

 

(4)    
Delegated authority to the MCA’s Director of Place, in 
consultation with equivalent directors at South Gloucestershire and 
Bristol City Councils, to recruit an interim chair of the MDZ, 
supported by an MDZ Board;

 

(5)    
Noted the direction of travel towards establishing a statutory 
Mayoral Development Corporation (MDC) for the West Innovation Arc, 
with detailed proposals to be developed through further evidence 
development, consultation and local engagement before being 
reported back to Committee for a decision.

17.

Brownfield Housing Fund PDF 122 KB 

To set out the strategic case for delivering 
the Brownfield Housing Fund allocation through the 
government’s newly established Housing Streamlined Route.

Decision:

The West of England Combined Authority 
Committee:

 

(1)    
Noted the receipt of a £45,005,618 allocation of the 
Brownfield Housing Fund capital grant and associated conditions 
from the Ministry of Housing Communities and Local Government 
(MHCLG);

 

(2)    
Delegated the detail of delivery to the MCA’s Director of 
Place, in consultation with the equivalent directors of the Unitary 
Authorities. In the event of a consensus not being reached at 
Director level, decision making would be escalated to the 
MCA’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO) in consultation with the 
Unitary Authority CEO’s

18.

Hicks Gate Masterplan PDF 1 MB 

To update the Committee on the 
status of Masterplanning for Hicks Gate within the Central Bristol 
and Bath Growth Zone, and to seek strategic endorsement for the 
Hicks Gate Masterplan. 

Additional documents:

Item 18a - Appendix Hicks Gate Framework Masterplan , item 18. 
PDF 6 MB 

Decision:

The West of England 
Mayoral Combined Authority endorsed the joint Masterplan for Hicks 
Gate as a non-statutory planning framework to inform emerging 
planning policy.

19.

Corporate Risk Framework PDF 1 MB 

To present the 
revised Corporate Risk Management Framework, including a summary of 
the key changes arising from the annual review and ongoing 
enhancements to the Authority’s approach to risk 
management.

Decision:

That the Committee approved the revised 
Corporate Risk Management Framework

as set out in Appendix 1.

20.

Audit Committee Annual Report 2025/26 PDF 109 KB 

The purpose of the Annual Report 2025/26 
is to bring together in one document a summary of the work 
undertaken by the Audit Committee. The production of the report 
complies with current best practice for Audit Committees. It allows 
the Audit Committee to demonstrate it has fulfilled its terms of 
reference and share its achievements with the main Mayoral Combined 
Authority Committee and is thought useful as a reminder to the 
organisation of the role of the committee in providing assurance 
about its governance, risk management, financial and business 
controls. 

  

A copy of the annual report of this Audit 
Committee is attached. 

Additional documents:

Item 20A - Appendices Audit Committee Annual Report 2025-26 , item 20. 
PDF 173 KB 

Decision:

The Committee noted the Audit Committee Annual 
Report 2025/26.

21.

Overview and Scrutiny Committee Annual Report 2025/26 PDF 114 KB 

The purpose of the report is to provide the 
West of England Mayoral Combined Authority Committee with a summary 
of the work and actions undertaken by the Overview and Scrutiny 
Committee over 2025/26.

Additional documents:

Item 21A - Appendix 1 ANNUAL REPORT O&S Committee , item 21. 
PDF 147 KB 

Decision:

The Committee noted 
the Overview and Scrutiny Committee Annual Report 2025/26.

22.

Joint Committee Budget Outturn 2025/26 PDF 207 KB 

This report represents the revenue and capital 
outturn of the West of England Joint Committee budgets for the 
financial year 2025/26 based on data from the period April 2025 to 
March 2026. Change request approvals are also included as part of 
this reporting process. 

Decision:

That Joint Committee:

 

(1)    
Noted the outturn position for the West of England Joint Committee 
Revenue Outturn position as set out in Figure 1 including reserves 
and the Capital Outturn as set out in Appendix 3;

 

(2)    
Approved the change requests for schemes in the Economic 
Development Fund (EDF) and Revolving Infrastructure Fund (RIF) 
programmes as set out in Appendix 4.

 

Calendar 

Committee information 

Constitution 

Decisions 

Officer decisions 

Forward plans 

Library 

Meetings 

Search documents 

Subscribe to updates 

What's New 

Return to main site 

© Civica UK Ltd.
