Forward plan
THIS DOCUMENT GIVES NOTICE OF
ANTICIPATED KEY DECISIONS TO BE TAKEN
AT TRANSPORT & CONNECTIVITY POLICY
COMMITTEE

This update published: Wednesday 18th February 2026
Contact: Amy Rodwell, Policy Committee Officer, email: policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk
BRISTOL CITY COUNCIL - FORWARD PLAN
INDEX OF PROPOSED KEY DECISIONS

The Forward Plan gives notice of anticipated key decisions to be taken at Policy Committees. It will be updated and published on the Council website
www.bristol.gov.uk on a monthly basis.

Key Decision
Under the Council’s constitution, the definition of a key decision is a decision which is likely to:

1) Result in expenditure of £500,000 or over.

2) Result in savings of £500,000 or over.

3) Be significant in terms of its effects on communities living or working in two or more wards in the city.

Non-key Decision
For additional information and completeness the Forward Plan also contains those items which are outside the definition of a key decision.

Policy Committee Meetings
Reports submitted will be available on the council’s website 5 clear working days before the date the decision can be made. If you would like a copy
by email please contact policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk.

-2-
Glossary:

APR15 Under the Council’s Constitution if a key decision needs to be taken with less than 28 days’ notice, it can still be taken under APR15 –
General Exception, if it is impracticable to defer it until the next scheduled Policy Committee meeting. The Leader of Council must be
notified and the report published as part of the agenda 5 clear working days ahead of the Policy Committee meeting.

Description of Exempt Information :- England, Part 1 of Schedule 12A of the local Government Act 1972

1 Information relating to any individual.

2 Information which is likely to reveal the identity of an individual.

3 Information relating to the financial or business affairs of any particular person (including the authority holding that information).

4 Information relating to any consultations or negotiations, or contemplated consultations or negotiations, with any labour relations
matter arising between the authority or a Minister of the Crown and employees of, or office holders under the authority.

5 Information in respect of which a claim to legal professional privilege could be maintained in legal proceedings.

6 Information which reveals that the authority proposes
(a) to give under any enactment a notice under or by virtue of which requirements are imposed on a person; 0r

(b) to make an order or direction under any enactment.

7 Information relating to any action taken or to be taken in connection with the prevention, investigation or prosecution of a crime.

-3-
Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee
Councillor Ed Plowden (Chair)
Councillor Graham Morris (Vice Chair)
Councillor Rob Bryher
Councillor Nicholas Coombes
Councillor Emma Edwards
Councillor Tom Renhard
Councillor Tim Rippington
Councillor Kaz Self
Councillor David Wilcox

The City Council’s website www.bristol.gov.uk contains all supporting documents and decisions for formal meetings and lots more
about the City Council.

-4-
Lead Officer Title and summary of Decision Meeting date Decision taker Report Type
Sam Wilcock, Policy Policy Committee Work Programme Setting - 19 Mar 2026 Transport & Connectivity For
Committee Officer Outcome Report Policy Committee Information
Sam.Wilcock@bristol.gov.uk To note the outcomes of the Policy Committee
Work Programme Setting workshop held on 29
January 2026 outlining anticipated policy
development work.
Non Key
Open

Adam Crowther, Head of City 20 mph Review 19 Mar 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Transport 1. To seek approval to progress to the Policy Committee Report
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u public consultation phase of the 20mph
k review to seek public and further
stakeholder input into the
recommendations to reduce the speed
limit to 20mph on 100 currently 30mph
roads (and a further set of connected
cul-de-sacs) across Bristol.
2. To seek approval to authorise the
Executive Director for Growth &
Regeneration to make a final decision
on which of those recommendations
will be included as part of a final set of
Transport Regulation Orders, following
the outcomes of public consultation.

Open

-5-
Lead Officer Title and summary of Decision Meeting date Decision taker Report Type
Shaun Taylor, Head of Incentive Funding 19 Mar 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Highways To seek approval to accept and spend the Policy Committee Report
shaun.taylor@bristol.gov.uk proposed Incentive funding allocation from
West of England Mayoral Combined Authority
(MCA) as part of the City Region Sustainable
Transport Settlement (CRSTS).

Open

Adam Crowther, Head of City Road Safety Task and Finish Group - closure 19 Mar 2026 Transport & Connectivity For
Transport report Policy Committee Information
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u To provide information outlining the key
k outcomes of the Road Safety Task and Finish
Group, including a skeleton strategy structure,
and next steps in developing a draft Road
Safety Strategy.
Non Key
Open

Adam Crowther, Head of City Workplace Parking Levy Update report 19 Mar 2026 Transport & Connectivity For
Transport To update the committee on progress with the Policy Committee Information
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u Workplace Parking Levy Outline Business Case
k (OBC) and to outline progress on key
project milestones.
Non Key
Open

-6-
Lead Officer Title and summary of Decision Meeting date Decision taker Report Type
Ian Hird, Head of Democratic Annual Business report 14 May 2026 Transport & Connectivity For
Engagement To confirm membership of the Policy Policy Committee Information
ian.hird@bristol.gov.uk Committee, proposed meeting dates and any
changes to the Terms of Reference for the
2026 - 27 municipal year.
Non Key
Open

Adam Crowther, Head of City Local Transport Programme update 14 May 2026 Transport & Connectivity For
Transport 1. To provide an update on the existing Policy Committee Information
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u local transport projects that are
k earmarked for delivery.
2. To provide an update on the current
prioritisation process for the new local
transport projects that are being
developed through Area Committees.
Non Key
Open

Shaun Taylor, Head of Capital Investment into Bristol City Council 14 May 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Highways Highway Infrastructure Policy Committee Report
shaun.taylor@bristol.gov.uk To seek approval to procure and award
contacts for capital investment in highway
infrastructure through the Highways Asset
Management and Civils Framework 2025-29
and Highway electrical assets term contract, in-
line with the procurement routes and

-7-
Lead Officer Title and summary of Decision Meeting date Decision taker Report Type
maximum budget envelopes outlined in the
report.

Part exempt
3

Adam Crowther, Head of City Healthy Streets Policy Adoption 14 May 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Transport To seek approval and endorsement of the Policy Committee Report
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u adoption of the Healthy Streets framework as
k an overarching principle for Bristol City Council
transport projects, and the implementation
where feasible of such tools and processes that
are applicable to design, scheme delivery,
engagement and communications.

Open

Adam Crowther, Head of City Kerbside and Parking Strategy 14 May 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Transport To seek approval to adopt the Kerbside and Policy Committee Report
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u Parking Strategy.
k
Open

Adam Crowther, Head of City Cribbs Patchway New Neighbourhood Funding 14 May 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Transport To seek approval to apply to South Policy Committee Report
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u Gloucestershire Council for Section 106 funding
k relating to Cribbs Patchway New
-8-
Lead Officer Title and summary of Decision Meeting date Decision taker Report Type
Neighbourhood; accept and draw down
funding for the delivery of A37/A4018 Work
Package 4; procure and award contracts for the
delivery of A37/A4018 Work Package 4 and
accept and draw down funding for the
development of the wider project.

Part exempt
3

Sally Self, Head of Strategic Q4 Corporate Risk Report 2025/26 14 May 2026 Transport & Connectivity For
Finance To provide an update of the current significant Policy Committee Information
sally.self@bristol.gov.uk strategic risks relevant to the Transport &
Connectivity Committee to achieving the
Council’s objectives as set in the Corporate
Strategy and summarise progress in managing
the risks.
Non Key
Open

Rebecca Baldwin-Cantello, Performance management report – Q3 14 May 2026 Transport & Connectivity For
Head of Equality, Data & 2025/26 Policy Committee Information
Performance To update on the Council’s Performance
rebecca.baldwin- Management Report for Q3 2025/26
cantello@bristol.gov.uk Non Key
Open

-9-
Lead Officer Title and summary of Decision Meeting date Decision taker Report Type
Shaun Taylor, Head of Supply and maintenance of Urban Traffic 9 Jul 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Highways Management and Control systems Policy Committee Report
shaun.taylor@bristol.gov.uk To seek approval to procure and award a
contract for the supply and maintenance of
Urban Traffic Management and Control
systems.

Open

Adam Crowther, Head of City Policy position on the rollout of Moving traffic 9 Jul 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Transport and School Streets enforcement Policy Committee Report
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u To seek approval for a policy position on the
k rollout of Moving traffic and School Streets
enforcement.

Open

Adam Crowther, Head of City Exemption Policy for moving traffic 9 Jul 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Transport enforcement locations Policy Committee Report
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u To seek approval of an Exemption Policy for all
k relevant and appropriate traffic enforcement
locations such as School Streets, Liveable
Neighbourhoods and bus gates.

Open

- 10 -
Lead Officer Title and summary of Decision Meeting date Decision taker Report Type
Adam Crowther, Head of City East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood 9 Jul 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Transport To seek approval for the Full Business Case Policy Committee Report
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u approval for East Bristol Liveable
k Neighbourhood.

Part exempt
3

Adam Crowther, Head of City Transport Investment Strategy 9 Jul 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Transport To seek approval to adopt the Transport Policy Committee Report
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u Investment Strategy
k
Open

Adam Crowther, Head of City Workplace Parking Levy Outline Business Case 9 Jul 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Transport To seek approval of the Workplace Parking Policy Committee Report
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u Levy Outline Business Case and approval to
k move to the Full Business Case.

Part exempt
3

Adam Crowther, Head of City Bristol Cycling Hub, Lawrence Weston 9 Jul 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Transport To seek approval for the Full Business Case for Policy Committee Report
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u Bristol Cycling Hub, Lawrence Weston.
k
Part exempt
3

- 11 -
Lead Officer Title and summary of Decision Meeting date Decision taker Report Type
Adam Crowther, Head of City Movement Plan 9 Jul 2026 Transport & Connectivity Policy Options
Transport To seek approval to adopt the Movement Plan Policy Committee Report
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u
k Open

Sarah Chodkiewicz, Head of 2025/26 Finance Provisional Outturn Report 9 Jul 2026 Transport & Connectivity For
Financial Management To present the Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee Information
Deputy S151 Officer Committee with the 2025/26 finance
Sarah.Chodkiewicz@bristol.g provisional outturn report.
ov.uk Non Key
Open

Rebecca Baldwin-Cantello, Performance management report – Q4 9 Jul 2026 Transport & Connectivity For
Head of Equality, Data & 2025/26 Policy Committee Information
Performance To update on the Council’s Performance
rebecca.baldwin- Management Report for Q4 2025/26
cantello@bristol.gov.uk Non Key
Open

Adam Crowther, Head of City Local Transport Programme update 17 Sep 2026 Transport & Connectivity For
Transport To provide an update on the Local Transport Policy Committee Information
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u Programme
k Non Key
Open

- 12 -
Lead Officer Title and summary of Decision Meeting date Decision taker Report Type
Adam Crowther, Head of City Joint Local Transport Plan 5 17 Sep 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Transport To seek approval to adopt the Joint Local Policy Committee Report
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u Transport Plan 5.
k
Open

Adam Crowther, Head of City Workplace Parking Levy Full Business Case 22 Oct 2026 Transport & Connectivity Decision
Transport To seek approval of the Workplace Parking Policy Committee Report
adam.crowther@bristol.gov.u Levy Full Business Case.
k
Part exempt
3

- 13 -
