Bristol City Council
Minutes of the Transport & Connectivity Policy
Committee

15 May 2025 at 4.30 pm

Members Present:-
Councillors: Ed Plowden (Chair), Graham Morris (Vice-Chair), Donald Alexander, Rob Bryher,
Nicholas Coombes, Tim Rippington, Emma Edwards, Kaz Self and David Wilcox

1 Welcome, Introductions and Safety Information

The Chair welcomed all attendees to the meeting and explained the emergency evacuation procedure.

The Chair asked the Committee members to introduce themselves.

2 Apologies for Absence and Substitutions

There were no apologies.

3 Declarations of Interest

There were none.

4 Minutes of the Previous Meeting
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

The minutes of the previous meeting were agreed as accurate.

5 Chair's Announcements

A number of officer decision notices have been published since the last meeting. These were available to
be viewed on the public website page ModernGov - bristol.gov.uk.

The Chair highlighted that at a recent City Of Sanctuary event, it was a request that Asylum Seekers are
provided bus passes to help them with their travel costs within a very limited disposable income. The
Chair intended to raise this with the new Mayor of the Combined Authority.

The Chair was pleased to highlight that Clean Cities Network has ranked Bristol 8th for having Child
Friendly Streets.

6 Public Forum

The Committee noted that the following Public Forum had been received.

Public Petitions
There were no public petitions received for this meeting.

Public Statements
Statements were received and noted as follows:

Ref Name Title
No
01 Maria Garbutt A4018 Roadworks
02 Claire Bowers Urgent concerns regarding ongoing
roadworks on main route into Bristol
03 Ninder Bassi A4018 Roadworks and Bus Lane
Scheme
04 Richard Coggins Stupidity of EBLN
05 Melissa Topping East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
06 David Redgewell, South West Transport Issues
Transport Network and Railfuture
Severnside
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

07 Imogen Griffin Bus Gate at Pile Marsh
08 Angharad Hughes East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
09 Lucy McCourt Underhand 3am Installation of the
“Liveable” Neighbourhood
10 Simon Easton East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
11 Jenny Blue EBLN and recent High Court ruling
12 Tom Swithinbank Bristol Business Improvement Districts
Consultation Response Summary
13 Stephen Wickham, Bristol Civic Society Replacing machined stone Cycle blocks
TPM with coloured tarmac in City Centre
plazas is unsustainable.
14 Gary Byard Gloucestershire catch the Transport Agenda Items
bus campaign and Gloucestershire
community rail partnership

Statements 5 and 6 were spoken to by those that submitted them.

Public Forum Questions
Questions were received as follows:

Ref Title
No
01 & Melissa Topping Making Bristol the UK’s most accessible city
02
03 John Northam Traffic management, Mogg Street
04 & Caroline Dunn Accessibility – East Bristol liveable
05 neighbourhood
06, 07 David Redgewell Transport issues
& 08
09, 10 Matt Sanders East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood bus gates
& 11
12 Alistair Onebanjo East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood bus gate
signage drawings
13 Dan Ackroyd Detailed feedback timing
14 Dan Ackroyd Measuring the quality of cycle paths
15 Dan Ackroyd Public interest (agenda item 14 – Old City/Queen
Charlotte St/Kind St – funding reallocation)

Those who attended the meeting were invited to ask up to two supplementary questions.

Q1 & Q2 – Melissa Topping
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

In response to follow up questions it was confirmed that;
- The Bristol Disability Strategic Transport Advisory Group had been set up by the Chairs of this
Policy Committee and Disability Equality Forum. The group has met three times before each of
the Committee meetings to provide advice about how Bristol can do its best for disabled people.
The group would look into the publication of minutes of their meetings.
- The co-design process for the EBLN has been completed and it is now in the trial phase. When
complete and data completed.

Q4 & Q5 – Caroline Dunn

In response to follow up questions it was confirmed that;
- Employees of Bristol City Council are professional officers trained to perform the tasks such as the
completion of an Equalities Impact Assessment.
- Every effort is made to make consultations public on AskBristol however, officers cannot ensure
that a consultation is included within the press.

Q6, Q7 & Q8 – David Redgewell

In response to follow up questions it was confirmed that;
- Officers will work with the Metro Mayor to help ensure Bristol has good transport connectivity
and to monitor rolling stock.
- Officers will work with neighbouring planning authorities and the regional authority to ensure any
new planning for a location for Gloucestershire Cricket Club Make includes a green travel plan.

Q9, Q10 & Q11 – Matt Sanders

Officers agreed to seek the following detail;
- When changes had been made to the signs at EBLN Bus Gates, how many were manufactured at
another size and how much money it cost.
- The diameters of the blue ‘bus route’ symbols on the original and revised version of the signs.
- When the six bus gates were installed in the City Centre, the yellow boards were added a year
later. Information was requested as to the effect of yellow backing boards on enforcement and
why they are not installed at Cumberland Road.

7 Annual Business Report

The Committee considered a report that presented the Annual Business information at the
commencement of the 2025-2026 municipal year. The report asked the Committee to note the
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

membership, chairing arrangements, terms of reference and meeting dates of the Policy Committee for
the municipal year 2025-2026.

That the Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee:
1. Noted the membership of the Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee for 2025/2026.
2. Noted the appointment of Councillor Ed Plowden as the Chair of the Transport and Connectivity
Policy Committee for 2025/2026.
3. Noted the appointment of Councillor Graham Morris as the Vice-Chair of the Transport and
Connectivity Policy Committee for 2025/2026.
4. Noted the terms of reference of the Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee.
5. Noted the Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee’s meeting dates for 2025/2026.

8 Petition Debate

The Committee considered a petition submitted by Councillor Mark Weston titled ‘Stop the Roadworks –
End the Madness’ signed by 3,017 petitioners of which 2,800 were Bristol residents.

Councillor Mark Weston spoke about the petition.

Councillors Bryher, Self, Coombes and Morris spoke to the Committee in response to the petition.

It was AGREED that the Policy Committee note the petition and provide a formal response from the Policy
Committee Chair. The response would outline the comments made and be published on the meeting
page as a supplement to the minutes.

9 Policy Decision on Cycleway Legibility

The Committee considered a report that sought approval from the Transport and Connectivity Policy
Committee to conduct a trial of red high-friction surface cycleways at two or more of the completed or
proposed sites identified as potential conflict areas, in order to inform future policy decisions on cycleway
surfacing.

It was noted that this was a key decision as it involved two or more wards.

The Head of Highways introduced and outlined the report.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

The proposal was to trial red High Friction Surface (HFS) at conflict points to best understand behaviour
change and benefits. Old Market Gap and Bristol Bridge were proposed as appropriate sites and findings
of the trial would be reported back for discussion.

Following Councillor questions, the officers confirmed the following:
 An example of where HFS has been installed can be found on Park Row.
 St Augustine’s Parade/Baldwin Street was raised as a good option for HFS in the future. Officers
confirmed that the site had been identified as a good study of the effect of surfaceway dressing on
behaviour change at conflict points. Initially officers would assess the impact on black tarmac
compared to non-delineation which could be followed by the impact of HFS in the future.6002
 It was important to use surface delineation to help highlight floating bus stops and reduce conflict
between cyclists and pedestrians.
 A concerns had been raised by equalities groups regarding red as a colour for people with visual
impairments.
 Conclusions following research and consultation had been that red HFS was the preferred material
and colour in terms of legibility, maintenance and the quality of surface.

Following the discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded
by Councillor Wilcox.

On being put to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously. It was APPROVED that;

The Transport and Connectivity Committee approved a trial of red coloured cycleways at suggested
options of high-conflict points, such as Old Market Gap and Bristol Bridge (with an incremental
approach to St Augustine’s Parade when appropriate) in order to inform a further policy decision on
cycleway surfacing. Subject to funding, final agreement was delegated to the Executive Director
Growth & Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of the Transport & Connectivity Policy
Committee.

10 City Centre Transport Corridor – Bond St Full Business Case Submission

The Committee considered a report which sought approval for submission of a Full Business Case to the
West of England Combined Authority for the City Regional Sustainable Transport Settlement funding and
subject to approval, to accept and invest the funding to deliver the City Centre Transport Corridor – Bond
Street improvements.

It was noted that this was a key decision as it involved over £500k and affected 2 or more wards.

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report which features one part of the delivery of
the Red Route outlined in the City Centre Framework from 2018; a rapid transit route extending from the
M32 through to Long Ashton Park and Ride.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

During discussion, questions and comments the following points were made:
 It was important to consider the full picture of this element within the overall scheme of the Red
and Blue Routes through the City. Modelling carried out subsequent to report publication
considered the wider picture showed that in the long term a significant number of people would
shift modes as a result of the five schemes that make up the City Centre strategic corridor.
 There was major concern regarding the impact of sequencing of the agreed CRSTS schemes would
have on the city due to the tight timescales for delivery. This was recognised at regional level with
mitigations in place which had affected the risk rating. Information would be presented to the
Committee regarding the coordinated regional response such as proposals for additional park and
ride buses and renewed priority for buses during roadworks.
 With a new Metro Mayor there was an opportunity to revisit and restate the long term vision and
ensure the aims of the schemes remain priority.
 Bus lane and gates could be used by all vehicles that use bus lanes. Bus Gates need to be designed
well and correctly to be effective. Transponders on buses can be used to trigger bus gates.
 The shared use path along the stretch to junction 3 will remain in use for cyclists. Cyclists could
also use the bus lane should they wish to.

Following discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by
Councillor Bryher.

An amendment was moved by Councillor Coombes as follows:

Amend recommendation 1 to read as follows:

1. Subject to the removal of scheme elements relating to new bus gate and traffic lights on
Newfoundland Way (westbound), and the proposed new bus lane on Newfoundland Way
(westbound) and Newfoundland Circus (westbound) shown on sheets 5 and 6 of the General
Arrangement Plans, approves the submission of the Bond St Full Business Case (as amended) for
approval at West of England Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA)

The amendment was seconded by Councillor Morris.

Councillor Coombes suggested that there was no evidence of a bus delay shown at the location
highlighted and no need for a bus gate at that location.

In response to the amendment officers clarified that although there was no difficulties currently at that
location, to not include that location would create a gap in the continuous route in the future. Further
modelling information had been provided to Members to outline the most comprehensive picture
possible and that modelling showed that any delay on Newfoundland Way approach would be reduced
due to modal shift.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

It was confirmed that the Combined Authority were developing an outline business case for an M32 Park
and Ride.

On being put to the vote the amendment FELL with 2 voting FOR and 7 AGAINST.

On being put to the vote the substantive recommendations were CARRIED with 4 members voting FOR, 1
AGAINST and 4 ABSTAINING. It was APPROVED that;

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:
1. Approved submission of the Bond St Full Business Case for approval at West of England Mayoral
Combined Authority (MCA)
2. Authorised the Executive Director for Growth and Regeneration in consultation with Chair of the
Transport and Connectivity Committee and Section 151 officer, subject to approval of the Full
Business Case by the MCA to
a. Take all steps required to accept and invest the CRSTS funding amount as set out in this
report and appendices
b. Procure and award all necessary contracts for this project (including any over £500k), in line
with the maximum budget envelope outlined in this report

Councillor Morris left the meeting.

11 CRSTS City centre – Redcliffe Roundabout and Redcliffe Way

The Committee considered a report which sought approval to submit the City Centre Transport Corridor –
Redcliffe Roundabout Full Business Case to the West of England Combined Authority and to accept and
draw down City Regional Sustainable Transport Settlement funding to implement the scheme.

It was noted that this was a key decision as it involved over £500k.

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report with key changes to a series of bus
priority, walking and cycling improvements completing the anti clockwise loop for buses around the City.

During discussion, questions and clarification, the following points were made:
 Beneath the roundabout there was a collection of utilities which would be fully considered as part
of the surveys and plans. If needed, some could be moved although it was hoped that as many
kerb lines as possible could remain in place to avoid disrupting drainage.
 A dutch style roundabout had been considered along with other alternative design processes over
time. Signal crossings were chosen as an important part of the design that helps control the traffic
flow into that space.
 Chatterton’s Square towards Temple Meads will remain open following engagement from the
Temple Quarter team with regards to access routes.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

 The signal controlled crossing on Redcliffe Street improves the zebra crossing which is currently a
conflict and frustration point between cyclists pedestrians and road users.
 There was the view that this could be an opportunity to increase public realm and reduce the
amount of however, improving the bus routes was agreed as alternative civic benefit.

Following discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by
Councillor Self.

On being put to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously. It was APPROVED that;

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity
1. Approved the submission of the Redcliffe Roundabout Full Business Case for approval at WECA
committee or WECA Directors.
2. Authorised the Executive Director for Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of
the Transport and Connectivity Committee to take all the steps required to procure and award
the necessary contracts for this project (which may be over the key decision threshold), in line
with the procurement routes and maximum budget envelopes outlined in this report, should the
FBC be approved by the WECA committee/Directors.
3. Authorised the Executive Director for Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of
the Transport and Connectivity Committee to invoke any subsequent extensions/variations
specifically defined in the contract(s) being awarded, up to the maximum budget envelope
outlined in this report.

12 CRSTS - Southern Gateway and Friary

The Committee considered the report which sought approval to submit the Southern Gateway and Friary
Full Business Case to the West of England Combined Authority and accept and draw down Economic
Development Funding, ringfenced as match funding for the City Regional Sustainable Transport
Settlement fund, to implement the scheme following a procurement process.

It was noted that this was a key decision as it involved over £500k and affecting 2 or more wards.

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report outlining that the scheme provided some
key transport elements to the Temple Quarter project. The Southern Gateway site (new planned
entrance to the train station) and the Friary. The CRSTS funding linked to sustainable transport element
with other sources of funding secured via the EDF.

Through discussion, questions, the clarification the following points were made:
- Comments made earlier in the year by Councillors which had been collated to be reviewed by the
design team and further consultation would take place by way of statutory consultation. A full
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

business case with transport assessment will be presented by way of the planning permission
application.
- Traffic modelling results would be made available, but it was unlikely to include information with
regards to low traffic neighbourhoods.
- There had been elements of futureproofing a route along the A4 towards Bath or South Bristol
out towards the A38 with the long term goal of a rapid transit system.
- Officers confirmed that other cycle parking hubs will be retained in the train station.
- Funding for the rest of the project via a Homes England grant is already secured through the
Combined Authority.
- The importance of an inbound bus stop with access from the South of the City was highlighted.
- There were reservations about the impact on the A4 over Bath Bridges which will be used heavily
by pedestrians, cyclists for the cycle hub and drivers for the multi storey car park as well as with a
bus interchange. Measures to reduce conflict include a walking/cycling route.
- At this point, authorisation was requested for the bus stops at the Friary, the cycle parking,
pedestrian entrance, the bus stop and cycle route at the Southern Gateway site.

Following discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by
Councillor Wilcox.

On being put to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously. It was APPROVED that;

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity
1. Approved the submission of the Southern Gateway and Friary FBC for approval at WECA
committee or WECA Directors.
2. Authorised the Executive Director for Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of
the Transport and Connectivity Committee to take all the steps required to submit the FBC and
procure and award the necessary contracts for this project (which may be over the key decision
threshold), in line with the procurement routes and maximum budget envelopes outlined in this
report, should the FBC be approved by the WECA committee/Directors.
3. Authorised the Executive Director for Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of
the Transport and Connectivity Committee to invoke any subsequent extensions/variations
specifically defined in the contract(s) being awarded, up to the maximum budget envelope
outlined in this report.

13 City Centre – Broadmead Area/ Union Street Area Outline Business Case and delivery

The Committee considered the report which sought approval to submit the Broadmead/Union St Area
Outline Business Case (OBC) to the West of England Combined Authority which, if approved, would secure
funding to continue development of the project up to Full Business Case (FBC) stage.

It was noted that this was a key decision as it involved over £500k and would affect 2 or more wards.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report which involved the key element of the red
route originally from the City Centre Development and Delivery Plan with pedestrianising Horsefair and
Penn Street. There was a further urban realm delivery programme which will come in through later
planned developments in the immediate area (Galleries, Castle Park, Newgate).

Following Councillor questions, the officers confirmed the following:
 Consultation would carry on with businesses in the area to ensure communication and to mitigate
impacts of the scheme.
 A two way segregated cycle way would be established on Haymarket in the middle of the road to
assist navigation of bus stops along that route.
 Three trees would be lost within the scheme with mitigations to replace with 31 trees as a response.
 Cycling through Broadmead is currently not prohibited with other cycle routes available. There
would be a similar approach to Horsefair and a segregated cycle route along Penn Street being
considered.
 The Transport Investment Plan would consider any loss of Pay and Display parking income and ensure
management of budgets going forward.
 Consistency in services around the time of demolition of the Galleries were of high priority along with
communication about changes and mitigation of bus service disruption.
 It was clarified and assured that no bus stop waiting would be required under Fairfax Street.
 Officers had worked with WECIL and disability groups to complete disability audits of the area, shops,
businesses, drivers and visitors. The designs included additional disabled parking bays following
consultation.
 Officers set out why the accelerated process to FBC had been proposed in this instance and the Chair
indicated that improved governance of project delivery may require agile meeting dates in future.

Following discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by
Councillor Self.

On being put to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED with 7 members voting FOR, 1 AGAINST and
no ABSTAINING. It was APPROVED that;

That the Committee for Transport & Connectivity;
1. Approved to submit the Broadmead/Union St Area Outline Business Case (OBC) to the West of
England Combined Authority (WECA) which, if approved, would secure funding to continue
development of the project up to Full Business Case (FBC) stage.
2. Authorised the Executive Director for Growth and Regeneration in consultation with Chair of the
Transport and Connectivity Committee to take all steps required to accept and spend the funding,
and to procure and award the necessary contracts, or professional services for this project up to
FBC (which may be over the key decision threshold), in-line with the procurement routes and
maximum budget envelopes outlined in this report, should the OBC be approved by WECA. This
will include costs to secure vacant possession of two kiosks at the north end of Union St.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

3. Delegated authority to approve the subsequent FBC to the Executive Director for Growth and
Regeneration in consultation with Chair of the Transport and Connectivity Committee.
4. Authorised the Executive Director for Growth and Regeneration in consultation with Chair of the
Transport and Connectivity Committee to take all steps required accept and spend the funding,
and to procure and award the necessary contracts, or professional services for this project
delivery (which may be over the key decision threshold), in-line with the procurement routes and
maximum budget envelopes outlined in this report, should the FBC be approved by WECA.

14 Old City/Queen Charlotte St/King St - funding reallocation

The Committee considered the report which sought approval for reallocation of funds in order to
complete the Old City/Queen Charlotte St/King St improvement project.

It was noted that this was a key decision as it involved over £500k.

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report which outlined the issues with the scheme
which was a complicated project had been affected by additional costs and delays leading to a budget
pressure as set out in the report. Within the £1m available, there is a proposed reallocation of an
identified £882k of EDF (CRSTS match-funding) no longer required by Bristol Temple Quarter Southern
Gateway Project. An Officer Decision Notice is currently drawn up to seek approval for a reallocation of
£450k of Integrated Transport Block funding to allow the works to continue which will be repaid by the
funding secured.

The project was complex as it concerned medieval streets and there had been conflicting priorities and
barriers to manoeuvre. The overall positive end result of the journey which had been navigated should
be celebrated. There would be a lessons learned process at the end of the project to avoid a repeat of
the issues in future.

Following discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by
Councillor Bryher.

On being put to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously. It was APPROVED that;

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity approved the reallocation of £882k of EDF to
complete the works of the Old City/Queen Charlotte St/King St improvement project.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

15 Procurement of new contract for supply, installation and maintenance of metrobus
iPoints

The Committee considered the report which provided background on the metrobus iPoints, details of the
upcoming review being undertaken by the metrobus partners to consider the future requirements for
iPoints, and the options available for managing the end of the existing supplier contract.

It was noted that this was a key decision as it involved over £500k and affected 2 or more wards.

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report confirming the options for the continue or
ceasing use of the iPoints with the recommendation to develop and procure a new contract to enable a
flexible review of how the iPoints are maintained. A citywide consultation would take place with
passengers, concentrating on users of the metrobus.

Following discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by
Councillor Wilcox.

On being put to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously. It was APPROVED that;

That the Committee:
1. Noted the background to the existing iPoints and the options for the future management of
iPoints as part of the metrobus network.
2. Authorised the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of the
Transport and Connectivity Committee, to implement Option 2b to take all steps required to
prepare a new contract for the ongoing management of iPoints, as outlined in this report.
3. Authorised the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration to take all steps required to extend
the current contract as required, should this be necessary, for the successful implementation of
Option 2b, and enable a smooth transition to a new contract.

16 Funding for Supported Bus Services Task and Finish Group Update report

The Committee considered the report which sought approval for the draw down of £1m from reserves set
aside for supported bus services, and the delegation of the award of bus service contracts, for an
additional £1m, to the Supported Bus Services Task and Finish Group.

It was noted that this was a key decision as it involved over £500k.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report. With £800k and an additional £1m
identified from reserves, the Task and Finish group would determine the allocation of services to
commence in August 2025.

Cllr Rippington thanked the members of the Task and Finish Group for their diligence and officers for their
work.

Following discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by
Councillor Rippington.

On being put to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously. It was APPROVED that;
That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity: -
1. Approved the draw down of £1m reserve for supported bus services.
2. Authorised the Task and Finish Group to take all steps required to approve the award bus
contracts for a further £1m to be awarded through the West of England Combined Authority.

17 Residents Parking Schemes Update

The Committee considered a report that outlined the current proposals for new RPS schemes and
consider how additional RPS schemes might be brought forward. A review of existing RPS schemes could
also consider the previously approved proposal to divide existing zones to reduce their size and limit trips
within zones.

It was noted that this was a report for information.

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report. The update report outlined that a project
manager would be secured to consider the elements within the report and return to the Committee
around October 2025 with a project plan to consider what areas to consider and the criteria to decide
how best to prioritise.

The following points were highlighted for consideration;
- The proximity to the City Centre and existing schemes.
- Lack of spare parking capacity in the area for residents.
- Consideration of the size of established parking zones and the current use of parking within,
including the possibility of dividing zones up.
- Consideration of houses of multiple occupations compared to a ‘household’.
- The cost of permits/parking within wards of differing levels of deprivation.
- The presence of local developments for example, where a RPS is mandated by planning and how
they impact on surrounding streets.
- The relationship with CAZ income.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

There would be considered integration with the Transport Management Plan and the Parking and
Kerbside Strategy via the Task and Finish Group. It was highlighted that there was some urgency to
progressing the project, although with acknowledgement of the pressure on resources.

The Committee for Transport and connectivity noted the report

18 Kerbside and Parking Task and Finish Group

The Committee considered the report which updated on progress to date of the Parking and Kerbside
Strategy Task and Finish Group.

It was noted that this was a non key decision update report.

The Chair of the Task and Finish Group, Councillor Bryher introduced and outlined the report.

Members commented that although the Task and Finish Group had looked at Lambeth and Portsmouth as
examples of implementation of a Kerbside Strategy, it was acknowledged that Bristol was unique as a City
with its own considerations. It was noted that a High Court legal ruling against Lambeth would need
further evaluation.

The Policy Committee for Transport and Connectivity noted the report and agreed with the approach
and next steps outlined in the paper.

19 Workplace Parking Levy Update

The Committee considered a report on the Workplace Parking Levy project, to outline the key milestones
for the Stage One development and Outline Business Case of the project.

It was noted that there were no decisions to be taken on this report which was for information.

The Head of Highways introduced and outlined the project plan within the report.

Following Councillor questions, it was confirmed that data collection was intended to be broken down
into different groups so that particular groups can be excluded from the schemes if considered
appropriate.

The Committee for Transport and Connectivity noted the update report.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

20 2024/25 Q4 Corporate Risk Management Report

The Committee considered the report which provided an update on current significant strategic risks, to
achieving the Council’s objectives as set in the Corporate Strategy 2022-2027. The report summarised
progress in managing the risks and actions being taken as at Quarter 4 2024-25, relevant to the Transport
and Connectivity Committee.

It was noted that there were no decisions to be taken on this report which was a non-key decision update
report.

The Director: Economy of Place introduced and outlined the report. The format and presentation of the
risk report to the Policy Committee was under review within the Risk Management Framework.

Members requested an opportunity to provide meaningful input into the Risk register and considerations
below the top line provided in the reports to the Policy Committee.

That the Transport and Connectivity Committee noted the report.

Meeting ended at 8.00 pm

CHAIR __________________
