Bristol City Council
Minutes of the Transport & Connectivity
Policy Committee

23 October 2025 at 5.00 pm

Members Present:-
Councillors: Ed Plowden (Chair), Donald Alexander, Rob Bryher, Nicholas Coombes, Tim Rippington,
Emma Edwards, Kaz Self, David Wilcox and Jonathan Hucker

1 Welcome, Introductions and Safety Information

The Chair welcomed all attendees to the meeting and explained the emergency evacuation procedure.

The Chair asked the Committee members to introduce themselves.

2 Apologies for Absence and Substitutions

There were apologies from Councillor Morris. Councillor Hucker attended as substitute.

3 Declarations of Interest

There were none.

4 Minutes of the Previous Meeting

The minutes of the previous meeting were agreed as accurate.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

5 Chair's Announcements

The Chair reported that two petition debates had been added to the agenda at short notice. These would
be brought forward in the agenda to be heard following the public forum item.

The petitions had been received after the publication of the agenda and allocated to the December
meeting, however, representations have been made for earlier debates so the items have been brought
forward.

6 Public Forum

The Committee noted that the following Public Forum had been received.

Public Petitions
There were no public petitions received for this meeting.

Public Statements
68 statements were received and noted as follows:

Ref No Name Title
01 George Foster-Morison Proposing a More Benevolent Approach to
the CAZ
02 Vicki Staatz Support for RPZ in St Andrews, Bristol
03 Bex Martin East Bristol Unliveable Neighbourhood
04 Alice Fewtrell SBLN
05 David Griffiths South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
Proposals
06 Melissa Topping - East Bristol EBLN end of trial
Open Roads campaign group
07 Mike Gifford No to rpz
08 Jan Ratcliffe Not enough exit and entry points for
Southville north and parking spaces
09 Mark Anslow South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
Impacts
10 Julie Platten Road Blocks in Southville
11 Laura Clough Whitehouse Lane: Four Years of Disruption
and Decline
12 Christian De Knock Concerns with the South Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhoods scheme
13 Sarah Hudd Liveable Neighbourhood Schemes (South
Bristol)
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

14 Evie Smets Views and concerns around South Bristol
Liveable Neighbourhoods
15 Nicholas Tanner Changes to roads in South Bristiol
16 Nicholas Trollope SBLN
17 Catherine Barwell Discriminatory - liveable neighbourhood
southville
18 Paul Swanton Access to properties in Bedminster and
Southville
19 Miles William Clarke Creating a Southville Liveable Neighbourhood
Zone will be dangerous for emergency
services
20 Jackie Liddle Complete Lack of Trust in the Process of
Engaging Public Opinions on the Proposed
ABLN
21 James Burns Concern over SBLN consultation bias
22 Dan Hudson South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
23 Andrew Ridley South Bristol Accesibility
24 Bruce Abrahams Consultation on SBLN changes in Southville
25 Susie Holt South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
concerns
26 Lucinda Fellowes Not-so liveable Neighbourhood in Southville
27 Ian Wardle Urgent South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
28 Sarah Wardle Urgent South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
29 Catherine Martin Southville Liveable Neighbourhood proposal
30 Christine Khalif I am very concerned about the Southville
SBLN proposals
31 Andrew Green South Bristol 'Liveable Neighbourhoods'. Stop
Roadblocks,
32 Darren Baker End of North Street Retail Trade
33 Peter Blair Working with the people you serve in a fair
and equitable way
34 Mary Carrol Residents Parking Zone (Item 8)
35 Anne Dockery Southville Petition
36 Alan Morris, Bristol Walking Bristol Resident Parking Scheme Expansion
Alliance Programme
37 Mo Dymond Objection to South Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood proposals
38 Michael Henry South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood (SBLN)
– Consultation and Process Concerns
39 Andrew Lewis Air Pollution
40 Hannah Craven SBLN scheme not practical for Greenbank Rd
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

41 Carol Casey/ Nasim Dumont Cycling
42 Luke Tredget South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhoods
43 Lynda Keeys South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood (SBLN)
44 David Redgewell Transport Issues
45 Alison Bramall SBLN concerns
46 Siobhan Martin East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood Trial
Review
47 Haydn Gill Support for EBLN and Temple Quarter
48 Peter Brooks Spatial analysis of petition signatures against
the EBLN
49 Elspeth Patterson South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
50 Elizabeth Newton Lack of consideration for safety of children
walking to Southville Primary School in
proposed SBLN
51 Kelly Smallcombe SBLN
52 Nicola Elliott SBLN
53 Robert Duxbury Bristol Resident Parking Scheme Expansion
Programme – OBJECTION
54 Ian Herbert The imposition of LN and LTNs has no
mandate and they do the opposite of their
name by damanging business and
convnenience for residents
55 Megs Smith What's behind the Liveable Neighbourhood
schemes?
56 Judith Thomas South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
Proposals
57 Jeanette Watt South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhoods - Stop
Road Blocks
58 Neil Chick South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhoods
(SBLN) – Southville North (Orange Zone)
Impacts
59 Jo Sergeant Workplace Parking Levy
60 MR SATYEN JOSHI STATEMENT ON SOUTH BRISTOL LIVEABLE
NEIGHBOURHOOD SCHEME ( Ref Southville)
61 Sue Hughes Trial extension
62 Teri Bramah Deep concerns regarding the imposition of
SBLN
63 Caroline Dunn How is it ethical?
64 Lucy Fiddick SBLN
65 Joshua Porter SBLN Southville
66 Councillors Tony Dyer and SBLN
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Christine Townsend
67 Caroline Dunn Transport
68 Brendan Taylor Transport

Statements 6, 41, 44, 45, 47, 55, 59, 60 and 67 were presented to the Committee.

Public Forum Questions
56 questions were received as follows:

Ref No Name Title
01 Cllr Patrick McAllister Spike Island Congestion Assessment
02 Dr James Stuart Feeder Road cycle route
03 & 04 Robin Millard Impact of South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood on
public transport
05, 06 & 07 Jesse Zyla 05 - Proposed Bus Gate in St Luke’s Road: REASONS
06 - Proposed Bus Gate in St Luke’s Road:
DIRECTION(S)
07 - Proposed Bus Gate in St Luke’s Road:
POSITIONING
08, 09 & 10 Nicole Little 08 - Criteria for a RPZ
09 – Consultation
10 - Scope of RPZ
11 & 12 Andrew McGrain 11 – Contingency Planning for Traffic disruption post
South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
implementation
12 - Will BCC consider reassessing the effectivity of
the current SBLN engagement and impose more
rigor on the process?
13 Linda Geddes Are you planning to consult St Andrews residents on
any proposed extension of the RPZ?
14 & 15 Ceri Carter 14 – SBLN equality impact
15 – SBLN economic impact
16 Simon Randolph Residents parking – environmental impact
17, 18, 19 Katherine Wale Residents parking
20, 21, 22 Jan Ratcliffe Southville north orange zone
23, 24, 25 Juliette Britton Residents parking
26, 27, 28 Melissa Topping East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
29, 30 Alison Bramall Road data; Petition
31, 32, 33 Sue Hughes East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
34, 35, 36 Matt Sanders Revised Signage for the Cumberland Road Bus Gate

37, 38, 39 Lynda Keeys South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

40 Maita Robinson Residents parking
41, 42,43 David Redgewell Transport issues
44, 45 Evy Loizou South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
46, 47 Dr Suzanne Audrey South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
48, 49 Elizabeth Newton South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
50, 51 Jo Sergeant Workplace Parking Levy
52, 53, 54 Brendon Taylor Transport issues
55, 56 Dan Bramall South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood

Those who attended the meeting were invited to ask up to two supplementary questions. The following
responses were given:

Q26, 27, 28 – Melissa Topping
The Traffic Regulation Orders (TROs) within the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood are permanent TROs,
consulted on and implemented. The current trial is focused on collecting and assessing data over the
defined period. A six-month trial period has been set. Data will then be reviewed thoroughly before any
recommendations for whether the scheme will remain in place. At the end of the trial, a decision will be
made on whether the TROs remain in place or are revoked.

Q31, 32, 33 – Sue Hughes
The scheme is designed to ensure access to all properties at all times. If anyone experiences specific
access issues, please report them directly to the officers.

Q41, 42,43 – David Redgewell
Officers will continue to engage with First Bus to address access challenges related to floating bus stops.
Councillor Plowden has agreed to request this as an agenda item for the WECA Bus Advisory Panel.
(ACTION: EP)

Q50, 51 – Jo Sergeant
Officers and Councillor Plowden confirmed that there is regular engagement with neighbouring unitary
authorities. It was confirmed that multiple scenarios will be modelled as part of the Workplace Parking
Levy options, in consultation with the business community. A Workplace Parking Levy would apply as a
charge to employers, and it is for individual businesses to determine whether any costs are passed on to
employees.

Q52, 53 & 54 – Brendan Taylor

Bristol City Council is seeking feedback from MetroBus users on the use of iPoints, with no decision made
at this stage. The Council is also continuing to explore funding options to maintain supported bus services
beyond April 2026.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

7 Urgent item - Petition debate: Stop Southville Roadblocks!

The Committee considered a petition submitted by Alison Bramall titled ‘Stop Southville Roadblocks!’
signed by 1,870 petitioners of which 1,510 were Bristol residents.

Alison Bramall spoke about the petition.

Councillors Edwards, Rippington, Coombes, Hucker and Bryher spoke to the Committee in response to the
petition.

It was AGREED that the Policy Committee debated and noted the petition. The topic of the debate, the
petitioner’s views and the Policy Committee’s views as per the debate were referred to the Policy
Committee Chair, who would send a formal response to the petitioner after the meeting.

8 Urgent Item - Petition Debate : Halt the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood

The Committee considered a petition submitted by Joanna Maple titled ‘Halt the East Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood Scheme’ signed by 2,377 petitioners of which 1,637 were Bristol residents.

Melissa Topping spoke about the petition.

Councillors Bryher, Self, Coombes, Hucker and Wilcox spoke to the Committee in response to the petition.

It was AGREED that the Policy Committee debated and noted the petition. The topic of the debate, the
petitioner’s views and the Policy Committee’s views as per the debate were referred to the Policy
Committee Chair, who would send a formal response to the petitioner after the meeting.

9 Management and Mitigation of CRSTS Scheme Delivery

The Committee considered an information report that updated the Committee on the likely short-term
impacts of constructing the City Region Sustainable Transport Settlement (CRSTS) schemes and the
mitigation measures being put in place to minimise disruption.

The CRSTS program will deliver major improvements across Bristol, expanding sustainable travel options
and enhancing the public realm. These changes will make it easier to walk, cycle, and use public
transport. Several schemes are scheduled for completion in 2027, meaning the next two years will
involve significant construction activity in the city centre and along two strategic corridors. During this
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

period, reduced network capacity and longer journey times should be anticipated. Mitigation measures,
as outlined in the report, will be implemented throughout the works. Importantly, the modal shift
needed is anticipated to begin during the construction phase.

The www.bristolonthemove.com website has been launched to keep people informed about the three
major transport projects. A key focus of the communications strategy is explaining why the works are
taking place, outlining the plans and timelines, and highlighting how construction may affect journeys. A
comprehensive comms campaign will direct people to the website as the primary source of information.
Members of the Committee welcomed the launch, noting that it will assist them in responding to
enquiries from members of the public.

The following comments or clarifications were noted:
• The website will be regularly updated with details of work phases, including any pauses due to
construction reasons. Contractors are being challenged to deliver at pace as well as allocate
resources appropriately.
• As winter approaches, with inclement weather and darker evenings, it was noted that bus usage
typically increases during winter months, while walking and cycling are more common in warmer
seasons. The schemes with the larger impacts were due to begin in the spring.
• The high-level funding bid for the Transforming Cities Region will be submitted by the Combined
Authority shortly. Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee Members have already received a
briefing, with a further update planned for the end of the year. Detailed proposals have not yet
been established.
• Councillors will be consulted as the Transport Movement Plan develops, ahead of its presentation
to the Committee in the spring.
• During works, priority will be given to ensuring pedestrians have clear and safe routes. While
construction will occupy some highway space, clear signage will help keep cyclists safe and inform
motorists of where cyclists are likely to be positioned.
• Cllr Self requested access to the report or link for the Bristol University study referenced, which
indicates that a modal shift to 55% active travel, 25% public transport, and 20% car use is required.
(ACTION)
• Regular updates will be provided to Members.

That the Transport and Connectivity Committee:
1. noted this report and accept that Bristol is entering a period of unprecedented works that may cause
delays and congestion to support the growth of the city and that work is underway to mitigate the
impact. Refer to the slide pack to see how the works will be mitigated.
2. noted that the CRSTS schemes follow the Bristol transport policy and the themes identified in the
One City Plan to promote and deliver sustainable transport to reduce the impact of positive city
growth.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

10 Bristol Resident Parking Scheme Expansion Programme

The Committee considered a report outlining the case for expanding Bristol City Council’s Resident
Parking Schemes (RPS) programme. The report set out how RPS implementation can support better-
managed parking across the city, prioritise sustainable kerbside uses, reduce private vehicle trips, and
improve safety and environmental quality within wards.

This was a key decision report, involving expenditure of over £500k and impacting two or more wards.

The Head of City Transport introduced the report and highlighted the following points:
• The report provided policy context and details of original schemes and zones previously
implemented.
• A previous review identified challenges with zone sizes and considered whether cross-zone trips
should be permitted.
• An informal consultation will take place on the proposals prior to statutory consultation.
• Prioritisation criteria feeding into the delivery plan were outlined in the report.
• Parking on the Downs area will be included within proposals due to its role as a major trip
generator.
• Three new RPS development slots remain, and further views will be sought from Councillors.
• The financial allocation total included £5m funded from Clean Air Zone revenues, to be recovered
through pay-and-display and permit income

The following comments were made:
• Members suggested CAZ funds could alternatively support subsidised bus services and a
timeframe was requested for when the funds could be repaid. It was alternatively noted that
repayment would enable funding for future projects, as regenerated funds would allow reuse,
unlike bus subsidies which require ongoing annual funding.
• Consideration was given to the link between Residents’ Parking Schemes and Liveable
Neighbourhoods, and whether these two initiatives should be applied together or separately.
• It was agreed that charges on the Downs could displace parking to surrounding streets, leading to
an RPS requirement. There was also the related development of the anticipated Van Dwellers
Policy. While these factors were considered for inclusion in the scope of the Parking & Kerbside
Strategy Task and Finish Group, it had been agreed they should be addressed separately from the
Strategy and by the full Policy Committee.
• Implementation of the delivery plan is estimated for the 2026/27 and 2027/28 financial years.
• It was re-emphasised that all schemes remain subject to public consultation.
• Members debated the appropriate cost of permits and whether higher charges could generate
additional revenue for the Highways Authority, from those most able to pay.
• Members hoped sufficient pay-and-display parking would be provided near high streets to avoid
negative impacts on local businesses.
• It was noted that the introduction of the first Residents’ Parking Zones after 2012, alongside the
Greater Bristol Bus Network, contributed to increased bus usage and reduced fares.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Following the discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded
by Councillor Bryher.

On being put to the vote the recommendations were CARRIED (5 voting FOR, 4 voting AGAINST).

It was APPROVED that;

1. That the Transport and Connectivity Committee approved the undertaking of development and
implementation work for the RPS areas identified in the delivery plans subject to the necessary
consultation and approvals.
2. That the Transport and Connectivity Committee approved the total allocation of £7,502,000 for
the RPS expansion programme of which £4,999,000 will be allocated from CAZ for development
work and implementation of the areas identified in the delivery plans (subject to the necessary
consultation and approvals), with a presumption that this money will be reimbursed to the CAZ
funds.
3. Authorised the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of the
Transport and Connectivity Committee to award the project, in-line with the procurement routes
and maximum budget envelopes outlined in this report.
4. That the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration is authorised to progress scheme
development, including public consultation and permit system implementation consistent with
existing RPS.

11 CAZ Exemption and Financial Support Package

The Committee considered a report that sought approval for a time limited exemption package for
eligible citizens with Clean Air Zone (CAZ) non-compliant vehicles impacted by the introduction of a bus
lane and bus gage on Queens Road and Park Street.

This was a key decision report as it impacted 2 or more wards.

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report. In response to questions, the following
points were clarified:
• Funding remains available to provide financial support for individuals upgrading their vehicles.
• Exemptions will allow eligible individuals to access the bus gate at the top end of Park Street.
Similar arrangements are already in place for other bus gates, including exemptions for Blue Badge
holders and within the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood.
• The anomaly was identified by residents after the scheme was agreed. Officers assessed the issue
and developed the proposed solution.
• Concerns were raised regarding disabled access to St George’s Hall, as the nearest parking would
be approximately 500m away, which may be challenging for some individuals. This matter could
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

be addressed within the Bus Gate Exemption Policy, which is scheduled to be presented to the
Committee.

Following the discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded
by Councillor Wilcox.

On being put to the vote the recommendations were CARRIED (5 voting FOR, 4 voting AGAINST). It was
APPROVED that;

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:
Approved the preferred option of offering a time limited exemption, one year from date of opening of
the Bus Lane and Bus Gate, and financial support package for those eligible citizens with non-compliant
vehicles who are impacted by the introduction of a Bus Lane and Bus Gate at the Northern end of Park
Street.

12 Cycle Hangar Policy

The Committee considered a report that sought approval to enact a target policy, as outlined in the Cycle
Hangar Policy Paper, for the delivery of 400 new cycle hangars up to 2030 and to adopt the proposed
position.

This was a key decision report as it impacted 2 or more wards.

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report. The following points were noted:
- Priority for delivery will be given to social housing areas experiencing higher deprivation, as well
as neighbourhoods with high household occupancy of terrace, flat shared, converted or
commercial property types.
- Social housing is prioritised because it was often designed without storage space, whereas newer
flats typically include cycle stores through planning requirements.
- The aim is to improve accessibility to transport options for those who may not have access to a
car, rather than solely encouraging people away from car use.
- Some funding has been secured through the latest Active Travel Fund, with further funding
expected to be coming forward.
- Suggestions for cycle hangars locations have been invited, with 500 locations received so far. It
was important to install hangars where they are most needed.
- Additional on-street infrastructure, such as public bike stands on high streets and at destination
areas, is also important to encourage cycling.
- Currently, user fees cover maintenance costs, with no income generation. It was suggested that
future schemes could explore options for public access and private bookings via an app, subject to
Councillor support and appropriateness, as a potential income source.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Following the discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded
by Councillor Edwards.

On being put to the vote the recommendations were CARRIED unanimously. It was APPROVED that;

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:
1. Approved the approach to future delivery and 2030 installation target set out in the attached Cycle
Hangar Policy Paper.
2. Authorised the Executive Director of Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of
the Transport and Connectivity Committee, to procure and award any future cycle hangar contracts
in line with the maximum combined budget envelope outlined in this report.

13 Centre Line Policy

The Committee considered a report that sought approval for a policy position that road centrelines on
selected 20mph roads are not reinstated as default following resurfacing so that road safety benefits are
realised, and are only reinstated where determined essential by the Road Safety Team. Alongside this,
the safeguarding process for reviewing and implementing changes was presented.

This was a key decision report as it impacted 2 or more wards.

The Group Manager, Road Safety introduced and outlined the report. In response the following points
were raised:

• Where possible, Ward Councillors should be informed where centre lines are not being
reinstated.
• It was confirmed that painted roundels indicating speed limits and cycle markings will be
reinstated.
• Each road will be assessed individually, and decisions on reinstating centre lines will be based on a
technical officer’s judgement and the balance of risk.
• On roads where vehicles are parked continually on both sides, centre lines often serve no practical
purpose.
• The current approach has been in place for some time has not resulted in any adverse safety
impacts. Previous objections were based on perceptions rather than collision data.
• Concerns were raised re learner, elderly drivers and future autonomous vehicles who may rely on
centre lines.
• It is argued that removing centre lines can make drivers more alert when encountering oncoming
traffic, encouraging them to assess risk. However, when that does not occur, it may increase
danger for more vulnerable road users, such as cyclists.
• Some Councillors expressed concern that there is insufficient research or strong evidence to
support the approach.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Following the discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded
by Councillor Wilcox.

On being put to the vote the recommendations were CARRIED (5 voting FOR, 4 AGAINST).

It was APPROVED that;
That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:
1. Approved the policy the default position of not reinstating centreline road markings post
resurfacing programmes on residential streets and selected 20mph speed limit unless there is a
specific road safety concern.
2. Approved the proposed process set out in Appendix A.

14 Vehicle towing contract

The Committee considered a report that sought approval for to reprocure the Highway Maintenance
Vehicle Towing Contract. The contract is essential to gain site possession to carryout Statutory Highway
Maintenance and other related works in Bristol’s busy urban environment. The towing contractor
removes parked vehicles which remain in place despite advanced notification of the work, and places
them in a neighbouring street.

This was a key decision report as it related to a decision involving over £500k.

The Strategic Highways Maintenance Team Manager introduced and outlined the report.
• It was confirmed that the contract relates to facilitating maintenance works and does not cover
parking enforcement.
• The contract will include robust communication requirements. If vehicles need to be moved, the
contractor will notify Bristol City Council Customer Services, Parking Services and Maintenance
Teams, as well as the Police, so that drivers can be informed of the location of their car, if they
call. Vehicles belonging to Blue Badge holders will be returned to their original location once
works are complete.
• Procurement and Legal Officers have advised that the contract for removing vehicles to enable
maintenance works is a service delivery contract, whereas the contract for removing vehicles from
double yellow lines or bus lanes is a concessionary contract. Therefore, the two activities cannot
be combined within a single contract.

Following the discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded
by Councillor Self.

On being put to the vote the recommendations were CARRIED unanimously.

It was APPROVED that;
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:
1. Authorises the Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration in consultation with Chair of the
Transport and Connectivity Committee to re-procure and award the Vehicle Towing Contract, in-
line with the procurement routes and maximum budget envelopes outlined in this report being
£1million over 5 years.
2. Authorises the Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration in consultation with Chair of the
Transport and Connectivity Committee to invoke any subsequent extensions/variations specifically
defined in the contract(s) being awarded, up to the maximum budget envelope outlined in this
report.

15 Workplace Parking Levy Update report

The Committee considered a report which updated the Committee on progress with the Workplace
Parking Levy Outline Business Case (OBC) and to outline progress on key project milestones.

This was a report for information.

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report.

• The Committee agreed to receive a further update in February following completion of the
modelling forecasts and impact assessment. This update will seek Members’s views to inform
final development of the scheme.
• Members requested to be kept informed of any issues identified, including financial implications
and potential changes to timescales.
• It was noted that the cost risk associated with future implementation of an IT system is expected
to be addressed within the Outline Business Case.

The Committee for Transport and Connectivity noted the update report.

16 Quarterly Finance Report: P5/Q2

The Committee considered a report which presented the financial forecast at Period 5 (P5) against the
budget as at the end of August 2025.

This was a report for information.

The Director, Economy of Place introduced and outlined the report.

In response to a question, it was clarified that the £207k risk associated with the energy price pressure on
the street lighting budget relates to the cost of energy. Although this pressure will have been reduced
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

through the citywide transition to LED lighting, energy costs remain significant and continue to present a
budgetary challenge.

The Committee for Transport and Connectivity noted the update report.

Meeting ended at 8.30 pm

CHAIR __________________
