Agenda for West of England Combined Authority Overview & Scrutiny Committee on Monday, 23rd March, 2026, 10.00 am - Modern Council 

Skip to main content 

Section menu 

Calendar 

Committee information 

Constitution 

Decisions 

Officer decisions 

Forward plans 

Library 

Meetings 

Search documents 

Subscribe to updates 

What's New 

Return to main site 

Home 
Agenda and minutes 

Agenda and minutes

West of England Combined Authority Overview & Scrutiny Committee - Monday, 23rd March, 2026 10.00 am 

Attendance details 

Agenda frontsheet 
PDF 94 KB 

Agenda reports pack 

Statements PDF 485 KB 

Public Questions and Officer Responses PDF 235 KB 

Printed minutes 
PDF 130 KB 

Venue: 70 Redcliff Street (BS1 6AL)

Media

Items 

No. 
Item 

1.

Mayor's Q&A

Minutes:

The Chair welcomed  Mayor 
Helen Godwin to the meeting for a Question and Answer 
session.    Members had been invited 
to submit up to two questions with the opportunity for two 
follow-up questions:  

  

1. Clean 
Energy: The Mayor identified clean energy as one 
of the region’s key growth sectors and noted the presence of 
400 specialised companies in the area that were focused on 
this.   She highlighted the importance of 
supporting those businesses to grow.   
She mentioned the ‘Warm Homes Plan’ which Government 
had chosen to launch in the West of England and also regional 
ambitions for solar, tidal energy and offshore wind.   She considered that with the current situation 
globally the government had been very robust about the commitment 
to renewables and energy security and she saw this as the way 
forward. 

2. Locally Generated Income 
Tax: The Mayor welcomed government proposals for Combined 
Authorities to retain portions of income tax. She considered that 
this would provide the fiscal autonomy needed to address the 
transport network, which she characterised as the primary barrier 
to regional growth.   She welcomed the 
Overnight Visitor Levy which would also enable the region to 
consider the specific transport challenges in relation to the 
visitor economy, nighttime economy and people working in those 
sectors.   She commented that if the 
region were to get an Integrated Settlement then that would enable 
us also to think about how we organise our own spending so that we 
can support transport more robustly.   
The MCA was also expecting a second TCR (Transport for City 
Regions) in the next spending review as well. 

3. Avonmouth & Severnside Infrastructure: Members challenged the Mayor on the ‘lived 
experience’ of workers in these industrial areas, citing 
dangerous walking routes, lack of lighting, and roaming dogs. The 
Mayor acknowledged that infrastructure planning had previously been 
too vehicle-centric and committed to working with community groups 
on localised safety improvements.   

4. Congestion 
Management: Members questioned the Mayor on her stance 
regarding congestion charging. The Mayor emphasised that residents 
must have a viable public transport alternative before such 
measures were introduced. She noted that current roadworks to 
improve the infrastructure were ‘painful’ but necessary 
for long-term improvement. She committed to improve the buses and 
highlighted the significant work around rail and the commitment to 
mass transit in order to give people other options, including micro 
mobility.    

5. MCA’s Business Plan : Members asked the 
Mayor to consider her top three priorities. She explained that the 
MCA was now focussed on delivery and said that firstly Transport 
was the key thing that she considered was holding the region back, 
so getting that right was really important both in the immediate 
sense but also in that longer term planning.   Secondly, gaining Established Status because that 
would unlock more funding and unlocked the Integrated Settlement 
which would enable the region to be a lot more 
ambitious.   Thirdly, ensuring that 
through our Skills Strategy we were creating opportunities not just 
for young people, but working age adults and people who were 
economically inactive  ...  view 
the full minutes text for item 1. 

2.

Minutes PDF 162 KB 

To consider and approve the 
minutes from the 26 January 2026 meeting of the West of England 
Combined Authority Overview and Scrutiny Committee. 

Minutes:

The minutes of the meeting held on 26 January 
2026 were approved.   

3.

Declarations of Interest under the Localism Act 2011

Members who consider that they 
have an interest to declare are asked to: a) State the item number 
in which they have an interest, b) The nature of the interest, c) 
Whether the interest is a disclosable pecuniary interest, 
non-disclosable pecuniary interest or non-pecuniary interest. Any 
Member who is unsure about the above should seek advice from the 
Monitoring Officer prior to the meeting in 
order to expedite matters at the meeting itself. 

Minutes:

There were none. 

 

4.

Chair's Announcements

To receive any Chair’s 
announcements. 

Minutes:

The Chair thanked the Mayor and 
the Director of Transport for a recent briefing on the Transport 
Vision.   He noted that Overview & 
Scrutiny’s input should have been sought before the Vision 
had been finalised.   He would provide 
Members’ feedback on the Mayor's Transport Vision to the 
Joint Committee meeting on Friday, 27 March 2026. 

5.

Items from the Public (Questions, Statements and Petitions) PDF 369 KB 

WRITTEN PUBLIC QUESTIONS (written 
procedure) 

  

1. Any member of the public can submit a maximum of 
two written questions in advance of this 
meeting. 

  

2. The deadline for the submission of questions is 
5.00 pm, at least 3 clear working days ahead of a meeting. For this 
meeting, the deadline for questions is  5.00 pm on 
17 March 2026 . 

  

3. Questions should be addressed to the Chair of the 
meeting and e-mailed to  democratic.services@westofengland-ca.gov.uk 

  

4. Under the direction of the Chair, wherever 
possible, written replies to questions will be sent to questioners 
by the end of the working day prior to the 
meeting. 

  

5. Please note - under the Combined Authority’s 
committee procedures, there is no opportunity for oral 
supplementary questions to be asked at committee 
meetings. 

  

6. The written questions and replies will be 
circulated to committee members in advance of the meeting and 
published on the Combined Authority 
website. 

  

PUBLIC STATEMENTS 

  

1. Any member of the public may submit a written 
statement (or petition) to this meeting. 

  

2. Please note that one statement per individual is 
permitted. 

  

3. Statements must be submitted in writing and 
received by the deadline of 12 noon on the working day before the 
meeting. For this meeting, the deadline for statements 
is  12 noon on 20 March 2026 . Statements should 
be emailed to  democratic.services@westofengland-ca.gov.uk 

  

4. Statements will be listed for the meeting in the 
order of receipt. All statements will be sent to committee members 
in advance of the meeting and published on the Combined Authority 
website. 

  

5.  Please 
note : 

  

If any member of the public wishes to attend the 
meeting to orally present their statement, they are asked please to 
notify the Combined Authority’s Democratic Services team of 
this at the point when their statement is submitted and by 12 noon 
on the working day before the meeting at the very 
latest. 

  

For those presenting their statements at the meeting, 
up to 3 minutes ‘speaking time’ is permitted for each 
statement. The total time available for the public session at this 
meeting is 30 minutes. 

Additional documents:

Public Questions to Overview and Scrutiny Committee – 23 March 2026 , item 5. 
PDF 175 KB 

Minutes:

The Chair noted that 27 valid questions had 
been submitted by members of the public.  Written responses 
had been provided and were available on the Authority’s 
website and had been circulated to members of the Committee.

 

The Chair noted that 16 valid statements had 
been received.   The following attended 
the meeting to present their statements:

 

1.   Rosa Kell

2.   David Redgewell 
(read out by Rosa Kell)

3.   Emilia 
Melville

4.   Matt 
Sanders

5. Zoe Mack

6. Jo Sargeant

6.

Recent Organisational Changes and Target Operating Model PDF 206 KB 

  To consider the 
report on the recent organisational changes and the Target 
Operating Model

Minutes:

The Director of Operations 
presented this report and commented that the Authority was one year 
into the three-year Organisational Improvement Programme 
(OIP).   This   
provided the opportunity for the MCA to make improvements to be 
ready for the opportunities that   
devolution presented and to deliver the Growth Strategy. The paper 
gave further information on the recent senior leadership changes, 
including the senior appointments and departures and explained how 
these shifts aligned with the broader transformation 
programme.   He explained that the work 
to the MCA’s structures was expected to conclude early in the 
summer, subject to a staff engagement process.   An update to include staff structures would be 
available to this Committee if required.   

  

He went on to explain that 
central to the paper was the development of a revised Target 
Operating Model (ToM) and that this would clarify roles, strengthen 
the accountability and reporting structures and improve the 
MCA’s capacity to deliver strategic priorities effectively. 
This also included the development of a Regional Delivery framework 
which would set out how the Authority would deliver the programmes 
and projects and how it would work with the Unitary Authorities in 
particular.   Overall, this report was a 
high level update and it provided an overview of the steps the 
Authority was taking to support improved performance, 

  

The following was noted from 
discussions: 

  

-         
Members asked for an understanding of the 
organisation of the Senior Leadership Team at the MCA and 
confirmation of how many employees the MCA had and the roles of 
those employees.   The Officer explained 
that the MCA had around 425 members of staff and this was projected 
to grow to around 500 in the next 18 months.   He would supply the information 
requested. 

-         
Members were advised that in relation to the Target 
Operating Model (ToM),   the first draft 
was designed by the MCA’s Heads of Service.   Following that,   Inner 
Circle had been commissioned to review and stress test it. Once 
this had been completed, the Heads of Service group would review 
the findings and share the final first draft with the Unitary 
Authorities. 

-         
Members asked that the cost of employing Inner 
Circle be shared with them.   The Officer 
replied that they would need to check with Legal before disclosing 
that information. 

-         
Members asked for reassurance that the ToM was being 
developed collaboratively across the region.   The Officer explained that the MCA was putting in 
place a new decision pathway which included the creation of a 
Regional Directors Forum which would enable that collaboration in 
the future.   

-         
Members noted that there would a project to develop 
a Regional development framework.   In 
this regard Inner Circle would be meeting with Unitary 
Authority   Chief Executives and talking 
to senior leaders to develop that piece of work   in a collaborative fashion.   

-         
The CEO offered a joint briefing for Overview & 
Scrutiny and Audit Members in response to concerns that there could 
be ‘double counting’ in this work after staff had been 
informed of any outcomes. 

-         
Members emphasised the need for  ...  

view the full minutes text for item 6. 

7.

Digital and IT Systems Strategy Overview PDF 117 KB 

To consider the report on the Digital and Data 
Strategy

Additional documents:

0.8a Appendix 1 Digital and Data Strategy Executive Summary , item 7. 
PDF 76 KB 

Minutes:

The Head of Digital and Data joined the 
meeting to introduce this report which provided the Committee with 
an update on the development of the MCA's Digital and Data 
strategy.   He said that it focussed on 
strengthening the Authority's internal digital and data 
capabilities, including the systems, data governance platforms and 
workforce skills that supported how the organisation operated. This 
was a key work stream within the Authority's Organisational 
Improvement Programme. The Authority currently delivered its 
digital and data services through a combination of internal 
capability and partnerships, which included a partnership with 
North Somerset Council and DELT. Through the development of the 
strategy, the team had identified that the Authority had a number 
of valuable data sources and examples of good practice.   The opportunity now was to better connect that 
data and treat it as a corporate asset so that it could be used 
more consistently to support decision reporting and insight across 
the organisation.

 

The following was noted from 
discussions: 

  

-         
Members asked about the ethical use of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) within the Authority.   
The Officer explained that it formed part of the Digital 
Foundations theme and that there would be an initiative to develop 
clear guidance and policy on ethical use of AI as part of the 
strategy. 

-         
Members asked about Open Data.   The Officer confirmed that in both the Trusted and 
Connected data theme which was about our digital foundations, the 
Authority were looking at how the organisation could better connect 
and reuse data. Also in work to develop the roadmap, the team 
were   looking at how to develop the data 
architecture in a safe and compliant way so that both internal 
users and external users could trust the data that they were seeing 
and understand this. 

-         
Members asked for details of what   systems were currently in place and a stronger 
sense of what IT systems would be needed over the next few 
years. 

 

Resolved:

That the report be noted.

8.

Constitution Review - Draft Committee Terms of Reference PDF 134 KB 

To consider the report on the proposed 
amendments to the Overview and Scrutiny Committee’s Terms of 
Reference

Additional documents:

09a. Appendix 1 Proposed Amended Terms of Reference , item 8. 
PDF 109 KB 

9b. Appendix 2 Highlighted Proposed Amendments , item 8. 
PDF 142 KB 

Minutes:

The Deputy Monitoring Officer introduced this 
report and explained that this was Phase one of the review. Phase 
two would follow the English Devolution and Community Empowerment 
Bill and the changes arising from that. He highlighted 
that    that there were some 
proposed amendments to the Act tabled recently and the Legal team 
would wait to see the outcome of those.   
He explained that the table in the report set out the main changes 
together with the reasons.     

 

The following was noted from 
discussions: 

  

-         
In the event that North Somerset Council joined the 
MCA, it was noted that as Overview & Scrutiny needed to be 
politically proportionate, this would need to be considered at that 
time.    

-         
Members suggested that there be flexibility in the 
length of Overview & Scrutiny Committee meetings depending on 
the length of the main committee’s agenda at that 
time.   The Officer commented that the 
only issue in relation to this would be whether the meeting was 
quorate 

-         
In relation to Task & Finish (T&F) groups, 
Members considered that it would be useful to codify those as 
suggested and asked whether members of a T&F group had to be 
members of the Committee.   The Officer 
explained that there was not any prescription around the task and 
finish groups themselves being limited to members of this committee 
on the basis that they would not necessarily be a subcommittee. 
This would allow the facility to call in expertise in a particular 
area to help with that particular T&F group. The group would 
report back to the Overview & Scrutiny Committee.   

-         
The Officer clarified that the attendance of the 
Mayor had been codified for her to attend for 30 minutes at the 
start of each Committee meeting and thiswould be included in the 
Terms of Reference (ToR ).   He 
mentioned that i t also provided that if, in exceptional 
circumstances, the Mayor was unable to attend, then written 
responses would be provided to the questions. 

-         
Members were pleased to see the formalisation of the 
responsibility of the Committee with regards to policy development 
and review.   

-         
Members asked for more information regarding the 
quoracy of meetings. The Officer confirmed that what had been 
provided for within the Terms of Reference was that it would be 
possible to hold an informal meeting in the event that the meeting 
was not quorate.   However, there could 
not be any binding votes in a meeting which was 
inquorate.   It was noted that the quorum 
was set by legislation and was not in the Authority’s power 
to change 

-         
Members expressed their concern about the future 
workload of Scrutiny with the extra responsibilities being given to 
MCAs.   They asked that the capacity of 
Members to oversee this work should be considered. 

  

The recommendations were moved by Cllr Mark 
Weston and second by Cllr Lucy Hodge.

 

It was unanimously

 

Resolved:

  

Committee: 

Endorsed the amended Terms of 
Reference of the Overview and Scrutiny Committee attached at 
Appendix 1 of the report and noted  ...  
view the full minutes text for item 8. 

9.

Work Plan Report - Including MCA Forward Plan PDF 122 KB 

To consider the report on future items on the 
Committee’s Work Plan

Minutes:

The Chair introduced the report which outlined 
the activities that had taken place.   He 
explained that the visit to Brabazon and the Western Innovation Arc 
had been put on hold whilst we were awaiting confirmation of the 
new town status but now that had been received, he would speak to 
officers about organising a date for the visit.   He mentioned that the Committee would be looking 
for briefing sessions in relation to Transport on Transport for 
City Regions (TCR) and further sessions on Bus Reform.

 

Members also suggested:

 

-         
A session on Lessons learned from CRSTS (City Regions Sustainable 
Transport Settlement) and the piece of working being carried out by 
consultants   

-         
In relation to the Transport Levy, Members requested further 
information about agreeing the new formulas   and when reserves could be used for cost 
pressures

-         
Members asked for a briefing or short briefing paper on Reserves 
for both transport and general reserves

 

Resolved:

That the report be 
noted. 

 

10.

Review of Reports going to the Joint Committee of the West of England Combined Authority and Joint Committee on 27 March 2026

To consider reports going to the 27 March 2026 
Joint meeting of the West of England Combined Authority Committee 
and West of England Joint Committee 
published here 

Minutes:

 

ITEM 8 MCA Mayoral Budget 
and Mayoral Budget Forecast 2025/26 and ITEM 14 Joint Committee 
Budget Forecast 2025/26 

 

The Head of Finance joined the meeting to 
provide further information on the Mayoral Budget 
and Mayoral Budget Forecast 2025/26.    He explained that the first report set out 
the Quarter 3 forecast position for 2025/26 for the MCA. He 
highlighted that overall the position was broadly 
stable. 

Revenue expenditure was 
forecast at £172.1m which was about £4.8m below the 
current budget. 

He said that largely reflected 
reprofiling and some lower in-year spend than anticipated in some 
of 

the grant funded programmes. 
Capital expenditure was about a £29.3m forecast which was 
about £12m below budget. That was mainly due to re-phasing 
within the transport programme.   He 
commented that Treasury performance continued to be strong which 
was leaving the Authority in a position to help strengthen reserves 
and   overall financial resilience for 
the long term. He 

highlighted that the report 
also introduced the 2026/27 Business Plan in Appendix 
12. 

  

He presented the Joint 
Committee Budget Forecast 2025/25 and explained that this was 
the 

Quarter 3 forecast.   The overall position was relatively 
stable   with some variances which 
largely reflected timing differences rather than underlying 
pressures. He said that the most notable of 

which was £2m spend on 
Environment due to the reprofiling of the Warm Homes programme. The 
report also sought approval for a small number of EDF reallocations 
and change requests across 

both EDF and RIFF programmes, 
primarily to reflect updated delivery profiles. 

  

The following was noted from 
discussions: 

-         
Members asked for clarity on the Future Transport 
Zones (Page 79 of the papers).   

Officers explained that this was a DfT funded programme and was 
around a total of £28m

programme of funding.   It incorporated a 
number of different projects including IMS   micromobility as well as the Mobility as a Service 
app and transport data hubs. 

  

The Head of Policy & 
Strategy presented the Business Plan item.   She explained that the team 

were implementing a project tracker 
that would track exactly where all the projects were. 
That 

would give visibility on 
delivery of the outcomes that were set out in the Growth Strategy 
and also 

in the Business Plan. The 
Corporate performance framework would enable the team to monitor 
progress towards delivering that. 

  

The following was noted from 
discussions: 

-         
In relation to Transport, Officers clarified that it 
was about increasing the modal share of activity travel and the 
satisfaction with the experience that users were having by 
making

that choice. 

-         
They said that the active travel schemes that were 
being delivered in the early years were those that were funded 
through CRSTS and the Active Travel fund allocations 
and   were already in 
progress.   It was not a new pot of 
money. 

-         
Members highlighted Priority 2 and connecting the 
region by improving the suburban rail network and considered it was 
more realistic to say that over the next 10 years we 
wanted 

to 
open a number of stations and identify these so there 
 ...  
view the full minutes text for item 10. 

 

Calendar 

Committee information 

Constitution 

Decisions 

Officer decisions 

Forward plans 

Library 

Meetings 

Search documents 

Subscribe to updates 

What's New 

Return to main site 

© Civica UK Ltd.
