Committee Report

KEY DECISION OR FOR INFORMATION: For Information

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 23 October 2025

TITLE: Workplace Parking Levy Update

Ward(s): Citywide

Officer presenting the report: Adam Crowther Job title: Head of City Transport

Committee Chair: Ed Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: Committee Chair

Purpose of Report: To update the committee on progress with the Workplace Parking Levy
Outline Business Case (OBC) and to outline progress on key project milestones.

Evidence Base:

1. In September 2024, the Transport and Connectivity Committee approved to spend up to
£1million on the Stage One development of a Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) project
including preparation of an OBC. In May 2025, an update report was brought to the
Committee to provide an overview of the planned key project milestones. It was agreed
that a report would be brought back to committee once key project milestones were met.

2. A WPL forms a potential part of Bristol City Council’s transport strategy and is outlined in
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 and the Bristol Transport Strategy as a key demand
management measure aimed at tackling congestion, particularly at peak times, and as a
means of providing significant additional revenue for transport improvements across the
city. The introduction of a WPL would help discourage car commuting and help increase
the use of alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public transport which would in
turn, improve people’s health and the local environment and can free up land for more
productive use.

3. There are three main stages to the development of a WPL scheme which are outlined
below. An estimated timescale is provided to indicate how long it should take to complete
each stage.

Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
Stage Timescale
Outline Business Case April 2025 – April 2026 (1 year)
Public Consultation, Full Business Case May 2026 – December 2027 (1 year to 18
and Scheme Approval to Secretary of months)
State for Transport
Implementation and Operation January 2028 – December 2029 (1-2
years)

4. The Stage One programme which is currently underway, is split into five key workstreams,
with a planned end date for all workstreams by April 2026. The timescales for some tasks
have shifted since last reported in May 2025 due to procurement and contractual issues
associated with appointing a consultant to assist with the project. However, the work is still
set to conclude by April 2026.

Stage Original timescale Revised date

1. Supporting studies April to June 2025 April to Sept 2025
and information
2. Surveys and data June to September 2025 October to November
collection 2025
3. Modelling, September to November November to January
forecasting and 2025 2026
impact assessment
4. WPL scheme October to March 2026 November to March
development 2026
5. WPL package and December to April 2026 January to April 2026
final OBC

5. In stage 2, data will be gathered about existing businesses in Bristol, as well as
employment projections for allocated growth sites, and this will be used to estimate the
number of potentially liable Workplace Parking Places (WPPs) that might be included in a
WPL scheme for the city. Initial engagement will take place with employer representative
groups to gather their input on the approach being taken in subsequent stages of the
project, such as the geographical areas in scope for the modelling.

6. The data gathered in stage 2 will be used to undertake the modelling, forecasting and
impact assessments in stage 3. This work will help to forecast potential revenue to be
generated by the scheme, as well as identifying other likely impacts on factors such as
congestion, air quality and economic outcomes.

7. At the end of the stage 4 workstream, a draft scheme definition will be put forward, which
will include the potential boundaries of the scheme, proposed charge, parking space
thresholds, possible exemptions and hours of operation. Engagement will take place with
key employer representative groups in this stage, following on from initial engagement in
earlier stages of the project. Wider public consultation is not typically undertaken for a
WPL project at the OBC stage.

8. In terms of progress to date, the Project Team has been formed and worked has started on
the Strategic Case for the OBC. Supporting data and information has been collated for the
OBC, and to assist with the planned modelling and forecasting work. This includes datasets
Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
on air quality, congestion, carbon emissions, existing public parking stock, travel to work
patterns and employment statistics.

9. A competitive tendering exercise has been completed to appoint a consultant to assist with
the project. Five consultants were invited to tender, and two consultants submitted a bid.
Systra have been awarded the work, and an inception meeting was held with them on 17th
September 2025.

10. We have officially engaged Nottingham City Council to provide expert advice and act as a
critical friend to help guide the project with us. To date they have contributed to the
development of the project plan, the preparation and evaluation of the tender
documentation, the initial communications and marketing strategy, and stakeholder
management. Officers and some committee members will be undertaking a study visit to
Nottingham late October to learn more about their WPL scheme and the benefits it has
brought to the city.

11. The Communications Team at BCC is engaged and are currently drawing up a
Communications Plan for the project. This will be firmed up once the consultant has
confirmed when the workplace surveys are likely to commence.

12. In terms of current and forecast spend, approximately £100k is allocated to be spent on the
project in 2025/26.

Alternative options considered:

No alternative options are currently recommended as the approach is in line with advice
received from Nottingham City Council who are the only local authority in the country to
successfully implement at WPL so far.

When the project comes to committee for approval at subsequent stages of the programme,
different options will be presented from the modelling.

Officer Recommendations:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity notes this update report.

Corporate Strategy alignment:

1. Children and young people - improved access to transport schemes and initiatives will
help ensure all children and young people have a good start in life.
2. Economy and skills – the scheme will help tackle congestion which can have a significant
negative impact on economic growth. Revenue from a WPL scheme will help ensure
people have improved access to jobs, skills and training.
3. Environment and sustainability – the scheme will help reduce congestion and in turn will
work towards BCC carbon and air quality ambitions. It will also contribute to BCC climate
and ecological emergencies.
4. Healthcare and wellbeing – the scheme will help tackle health inequalities by providing
people with improved access to a range of sustainable transport opportunities such as
walking and cycling that will help improve their health and wellbeing.
5. Homes and communities – the scheme can help increase revenue towards transport
schemes that can provide more healthy, resilient and inclusive neighbourhoods.
Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
6. Transport and connectivity – a WPL can enable investment in a more reliable,
convenient and safer network of public transport and infrastructure for walking and cycling.
7. Effective development organisation – the project aligns with our One City approach of
working with our partners to deliver long-term ambitions for the city.

City Benefits:

1. The introduction of a WPL has benefits associated with a reduction in car use and a
subsequent increase in the use of alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public
transport. In turn this will have a positive impact on people’s health.
2. A reduction in car trips into the city centre is likely to result in a reduction in the amount of
carbon emissions.
3. A reduction in the number of car trips will have a beneficial impact on air quality.
4. Improved air quality and a reduction in traffic noise will have a beneficial impact on health.
5. A reduction in car-based trips will help reduce congestion and the negative impacts
associated with this such as delays and the negative impact this has on economic growth.
6. The greatest potential benefit will be through the transport measures/schemes that can be
funded through the revenue raised by a WPL. The revenue should be substantial,
predictable and locally generated and will significantly help BCC to develop and deliver
transport infrastructure and initiatives in the longer term.
7. The additional revenue generated could fund more sustainable transport options which are
particularly beneficial to younger, older people and disabled people who tend to have more
limited access to a car and rely more on public transport to access key services such as
education and healthcare.

Consultation Details:

1. A WPL is referenced in and consulted on as part of Joint Local Transport Plan 4 and the
Bristol Transport Strategy.
2. A Stakeholder Management Strategy and accompanying Communications Plan form a key
part of the Stage One work.
3. A Stakeholder Radar has already been produced as part of the Feasibility Study undertaken
by Nottingham CC; this outlines those stakeholders who will be both vital and necessary to
engage and consult with as part of the programme. Further information on this is outlined
from page 38 onwards of the Feasibility Study (see Appendix A).
4. Following approval of this report, a more detailed project plan will be produced which will
further outline the stages at which consultation will take place throughout the programme.
5. Formal public consultation is proposed as part of Stage Two of the WPL project if it
progresses beyond the OBC stage.
6. Further updates will be brought to the Transport Connectivity Committee as the project
progresses.
7. At the end of the Stage One programme, a proposal will be brought back to the Transport
and Connectivity Policy Committee for approval and to progress to the next stage.

Background Documents:
1. Appendix A: Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol – Final Draft.
2. 12 September 2024 Transport and Connectivity Committee Workplace Parking Levy report
3. 15 May 2025 Transport and Connectivity Committee Workplace Parking Levy report

Revenue £ 1million Source of Revenue Clean Air Zone fund
Cost Funding
Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
Capital Cost £ Source of Capital
Funding
One off cost ☐ Ongoing Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving? N/A
cost ☒ OR Income generation proposal ☐

Professional comments section:

1. Finance Advice: This report is providing an update on the development of a workplace
parking levy (WPL) within Bristol. The WPL is intended to reduce congestion, improve air
quality, and generate revenue for sustainable transport improvements. Previous approval
was given to use £1 million of CAZ funding to develop this scheme and this is captured within
CAZ funding monitoring. It is anticipated that the levy will replenish the CAZ funding pot within
a few years of operation, however finance has not been provided with detail to support this.
To date, approximately £26,000 has been spent developing the levy and it is presumed that
most of the £1 million allocated will be spent within the 2026/27 financial year.

Future implementation will require IT systems to manage and enforce the levy. No systems
have yet been scoped, which could pose integration or cost risks later.
In addition, effective consultation is critical, especially given the potential impact on
employers and commuters. Reputational risk for the council, along with risk of public
resistance is high, if engagement is not well managed.

Finance Business Partner: Vivi Sargioti, Finance Business Partner - Growth &
Regeneration, 15 September 2025

2. Legal Advice: As this is an update report on progress towards the OBC there are no specific
legal implications arising from the report.

Legal Team Manager: Joanne Mansfield 11 September 2025

3. Implications on IT: There are likely to be I.T. systems needed to support and manage WPL.
I.T. are supportive of the proposal and can be engaged through the existing work request
process.

IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead Enterprise Architect – 10 September 2025

4. HR Advice: There are no HR implications evident

HR Partner: Celia Williams, HR Business Partner, 25 September 2025

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal YES

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) NO

Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment NO

Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
