Agenda for Joint meeting - West of England Combined Authority Committee and West of England Joint Committee on Friday, 27th March, 2026, 1.00 pm - Modern Council 

Skip to main content 

Section menu 

Calendar 

Committee information 

Constitution 

Decisions 

Officer decisions 

Forward plans 

Library 

Meetings 

Search documents 

Subscribe to updates 

What's New 

Return to main site 

Home 
Agenda, decisions and draft minutes 

Agenda, decisions and draft minutes

Joint meeting - West of England Combined Authority Committee and West of England Joint Committee - Friday, 27th March, 2026 1.00 pm 

Attendance details 

Agenda frontsheet 
PDF 118 KB 

Agenda reports pack 

Comments Received from the Authority's Overview & Scrutiny Committee PDF 94 KB 

Comments Received from the Authority's Audit Committee PDF 68 KB 

Public Questions and the Mayor's Responses PDF 681 KB 

Statements PDF 642 KB 

Printed decisions 
PDF 85 KB 

Printed draft minutes 
PDF 154 KB 

Statements from the Public PDF 21 KB 

Venue: 70 Redcliff Street (BS1 6AL)

Media

Items 

No. 
Item 

1.

Apologies for Absence

To receive apologies for absence from Members. 

Minutes:

Mayor Helen Godwin welcomed 
everybody to the meeting.   

  

Apologies for absence had been 
received from Cllr Mike Bell, Leader, North Somerset 
Council.   Cllr Catherine Gibbons 
attended as substitute. 

2.

Declarations of interest under the Localism Act 2011

Members who consider that they have an interest to declare are 
asked to state: 

a) The item number in which they have an interest; 

b) The nature of the interest, and; 

c) Whether the interest is a disclosable pecuniary interest, 
non-disclosable pecuniary interest or non-pecuniary 
interest. 

  

Any Member who is unsure about the above should seek advice from 
the Monitoring Officer prior to the meeting in order to expedite 
matters at the meeting itself. 

Minutes:

No declarations of interest 
were declared in relation to the Localism Act 2011. 

3.

Minutes PDF 172 KB 

To consider and approve the minutes of the West of England 
Combined Authority Committee meeting held on 30 January 
2026. 

Minutes:

The minutes of the meeting held 
on 30 January 2026 were agreed as a correct record. 

4.

Chair's Announcements

To receive any announcements from the Chair of the West of 
England Combined Authority Committee. 

Minutes:

The following announcements 
were made by Mayor Godwin: 

  

The 
Chair welcomed members and highlighted a wide range of activity 
since the previous meeting. A public consultation on North Somerset 
joining the Combined Authority was live until 10 April 2026, and 
residents and businesses were encouraged to respond. 

  

The 
Chair reported on recent regional initiatives, including the 
establishment of a new Business Board, chaired by Jo Dally and Nick 
Sturge, and the successful hosting of the British Business 
Bank’s first Investor Roadshow in Bristol, attended by over 
170 investors. Her visits across the region included the BBC 
Natural History Unit, Wake the Tiger, and the new Youth Zone in 
South Bristol. 

  

A 
newly discovered species of club fungus in Bath and North East 
Somerset had drawn national and international attention, and 
members were encouraged to volunteer for the West of England 
Wildlife Index Project ahead of the forthcoming State of Nature 
Report. 

  

On 
transport matters, the Chair highlighted the publication of a new 
joined?up transport vision, record government investment, and 
continued progress on improving bus, rail, walking, and cycling 
infrastructure. A new agreement with the Department for Transport 
would secure half?hourly rail services across key routes. 
Engagement sessions had begun in advance of major works on the 
Portishead Line, which would significantly reduce commuting times 
for over 50,000 residents. Work on delivering five new rail 
stations continued, including progress on Bristol Brabazon Station 
adjacent to the Aviva Arena. 

  

The 
West Innovation Arc had entered national consultation regarding 
possible designation as a new town, supported by the government. 
The region had secured £45 million from the Brownfield 
Housing Fund—its first allocation—aimed at unlocking 
new homes, including affordable housing. The Chair also marked the 
start of work on the Jingle Jam House, the UK’s first patient 
hotel for families of children undergoing hospital 
treatment. 

  

The 
Chair announced the launch of a new Voluntary and Community Sector 
Support Fund, part of the Regional Youth Guarantee Trailblazer, 
with applications recently closed. 

  

On 
buses, child fares had been frozen at £1 until spring 2029, 
free travel schemes have been extended for care leavers and youth 
guarantee participants, and the Kids Go Free initiative will return 
for the Easter holidays, having already doubled journey numbers in 
several lower?income areas. 

  

The Chair invited leaders to 
update the committee on their respective advisory 
boards: 

  

Planning, Housing and Regeneration Advisory Board (Cllr 
Dyer): Positive first meeting covering 
terms of reference, new development proposals, homelessness and 
rough sleeping, cladding remediation, and a new regional affordable 
housing portal. 

Transport Advisory Board (Cllr Guy) Constructive inaugural meeting focused on the strategic 
transport plan, governance improvements, data?driven monitoring, 
capacity challenges, and plans for topic?specific 
workshops. 

Economy and Skills Advisory Board (Cllr Tyrrell): 
Collaborative first meeting addressing skills 
funding changes, community learning, school engagement, priority 
sectors, and development of a regional skills strategy. 
Consideration will be given to increasing meeting 
frequency. 

  

No 
update was available for the Climate and Nature Advisory 
Board . 

5.

Items from the Public PDF 422 KB 

WRITTEN PUBLIC QUESTIONS 

  

1. Any member of the public can submit a maximum of 
two written questions in advance of this meeting. 

  

2. The deadline for the submission of questions is 
5.00pm, at least 3 clear working days ahead of a meeting. For this 
meeting, the deadline for questions is  5.00pm on Monday 23 
March 2026 . 

  

3. Questions should be addressed to the Chair of 
the meeting and e-mailed to  democratic.services@westofengland-ca.gov.uk . 

  

4. Under the direction of the Chair, wherever 
possible, written replies to questions will be sent to questioners 
by the end of the working day prior to the meeting. 

  

5. Please note - under the Combined 
Authority’s committee procedures, there is no opportunity for 
oral supplementary questions to be asked at committee 
meetings. 

  

6. The written questions and replies will be 
circulated to committee members in advance of the meeting and 
published on the Combined Authority website. 

  

PUBLIC STATEMENTS 

  

1. Any member of the public may submit a written 
statement (or petition) to this meeting. 

  

2. Please note that one statement per individual is 
permitted. 

  

3. Statements must be submitted in writing and 
received by the deadline of 12 noon on the working day before the 
meeting. For this meeting, the deadline for statements 
is  12 noon on Thursday 26 March 2026.  Statements 
should be emailed to  democratic.services@westofengland-ca.gov.uk . 

  

4. Statements will be listed for the meeting in the 
order of receipt. All statements will be sent to committee members 
in advance of the meeting and published on the Combined Authority 
website. 

  

5.  Please note : If any member of 
the public wishes to attend the meeting to orally present their 
statement, they are asked please to notify the Combined 
Authority’s Democratic Services team of this at the point 
when their statement is submitted and by 12noon on the working day 
before the meeting at the very latest. 

  

6. For those presenting their statements at the 
meeting, up to 3 minutes ‘speaking time’ is permitted 
for each statement. The total time available for the public session 
at this meeting is 30 minutes. 

Additional documents:

Statements , item 5. 
PDF 420 KB 

Minutes:

94 
questions had been received from members of the public in advance 
of this meeting.   These questions and 
the Mayor’s responses had been published and circulated prior 
to the meeting. 

  

In 
addition, 64 statements had been received prior to the 
meeting.   Again, these had been 
published and circulated in advance of the meeting.   The following persons who had submitted statements 
attended the meeting and were invited to address the Committee for 
a maximum time of three minutes each on the topic of their 
statements: 

  

·        
Rosa Kell 

·        
Tony Jones 

·        
Jackie Head 

·        
Jo Sergeant 

·        
Tricia Woodhead 

·        
Ian Pond 

·        
Mat Sanders 

·        
Charlie Siret 

·        
Salem Bennett 

  

6.

Comments from the West of England Combined Authority Overview & Scrutiny Committee PDF 47 KB 

To receive comments from the 
Chair (or Chair’s representative) on behalf of the Combined 
Authority’s Overview & Scrutiny Committee. 

Minutes:

Councillor Jerome Thomas, Chair of the Authority’s 
Overview & Scrutiny Committee, attended the meeting and 
addressed the Committee with the comments received from that 
Committee. The Overview & Scrutiny Committee’s comments 
had been published and circulated prior to the meeting and are 
summarised as follows: 

  

Cllr 
Thomas began by expressing concern regarding the recent incident 
that occurred at the meeting of the Authority’s Overview 
& Scrutiny Committee on the previous   Monday and confirmed his Committee’s support 
for the additional safety measures introduced. 

  

Business Plan 

The 
Overview & Scrutiny Committee had noted the extensive number of 
actions within the Business Plan. 

The 
Mayor had been asked to identify her top three priorities for the 
year, which had been confirmed as: 

Transport 

Gaining established status 

Delivering the skills strategy 

The 
Committee had welcomed the introduction of the Social Value 
Framework. 

Transport Vision 

Scrutiny members had met with the Mayor and the Director of 
Transport in advance of the meeting to discuss the Transport 
Vision; this was welcomed. 

However, the Committee believed scrutiny input should have been 
sought prior to the vision being finalised and 
publicised. 

Given the high public interest, the Committee highlighted 
several points for the Combined Authority Committee to note: 

Congestion: The need for clear short- and medium?term measures 
to tackle congestion, acknowledging that mass transit was a 
long-term solution. These should include both incentives and 
deterrents (“carrot and stick”). 

Funding: Recognition that current funding was inadequate to meet 
transport ambitions, and central government contributions would 
only partly close the gap. 

Congestion Charging: The Mayor had advised that any 
consideration of congestion charging rested with Bristol and Bath 
& North East Somerset councils. 

Design Principles: The Committee would have liked to see 
stronger emphasis on health, sustainability and safety within the 
vision, and recommended these be integrated in the next planning 
stages. 

Engagement: Greater public and stakeholder engagement was 
essential, particularly in the context of budget 
constraints. 

Bus 
Network Control: The Committee supported increased ambition for bus 
network control, including a staged progression toward franchising 
and full public ownership, with clear timelines and scheduled 
scrutiny involvement. 

Transport for City Region (TCR) 

The 
Committee welcomed the increase in budget from £10m to 
£50m within the TCR proposal, enabled through an increased 
overprogramming rate of 25%. 

While supportive of investment in active travel, the Committee 
cautioned that overprogramming could embed a risk of 
underperformance. 

The 
Committee emphasised the need for strong public engagement on mass 
transit priorities, network design, and sequencing. 

Joint Working 

The 
Committee welcomed improved coordination between the Director of 
Transport and the Directors of the Unitary Authorities, recognising 
this as a positive step toward streamlining 
decision?making. 

Other Points 

The 
Committee welcomed the new glossary of projects within the budget 
papers for aiding clarity. 

The 
Committee expressed disappointment at the loss of the £10m 
Green Growth West Fund but welcomed the creation of the £25m 
Creative Place Growth Fund and were reassured about the planned 
distribution measures. 

  

7.

Comments from the West of England Combined Authority Audit Committee PDF 30 KB 

To receive comments from the 
Chair (or Chair’s representative) on behalf of the Combined 
Authority’s Audit Committee. 

Minutes:

Councillor David Wilcox, Chair of the Authority’s Audit 
Committee, attended the meeting and addressed the Committee with 
the activities from that Committee. The Audit Committee’s 
comments had been published and circulated prior to the meeting and 
are summarised as follows: 

  

The 
Audit Committee had met on Monday 2 March at 10.00am, considering 
19 substantial agenda items. It was noted that the Committee 
currently had three independent members; however, one of the 
independent members Christine Fraser had resigned, creating a 
vacancy. The Committee recorded its thanks for her 
contributions. 

  

The 
Committee sought assurance on several key items, 
including: 

The 
Quarterly Corporate Risk Register and Risk Framework Annual 
Review. 

A 
deep dive into Risk CR8 concerning whether the Mayoral 
Authority’s financial plans adequately address the climate 
and ecological emergencies, which prompted significant questioning 
of officers. 

The 
Internal Audit Plan for 2026/27. 

An 
update from Grant Thornton. 

A 
Value for Money report on IR35 compliance, with a request for 
further information. 

The 
rebaselining of the City Region Sustainable Transport 
Settlement. 

The 
outcome of the National Fraud Initiative. 

Social value considerations in procurement and 
contracts. 

The 
Audit Committee’s Terms of Reference, where concerns were 
raised and amendments suggested. 

  

By 
1.00pm, the meeting adjourned before considering the remaining 
items, including the Information Governance Update, Treasury 
Management Monitoring Update, Review of the Reserves Policy, UK 
Shared Prosperity Fund, the Interim Audit Committee Annual Report, 
and the Forward Work Plan. 

  

The 
Committee would reconvene on 27 April 2026 to consider the 
outstanding items and further proposed changes to the Terms of 
Reference and Constitution ahead of the Combined Authority AGM in 
June. 

  

Thanks were expressed to officers and members for their 
continued efforts to ensure a valid audit judgement for the Mayoral 
Combined Authority. 

8.

Mayoral Combined Authority and Mayoral Budget Forecast 2025/26 PDF 816 KB 

This report represents the revenue and 
capital forecast for the West of England Mayoral Combined Authority 
(MCA) Committee for the financial year 2025/26 based on data from 
the period April 2025 to January 2026 for 
both the West of England MCA and Mayoral budgets. 

Additional documents:

Item 08A - Appendix 12 MCA Business Plan 26-27 , item 8. 
PDF 348 KB 

Decision:

The West of England Combined 
Authority Committee: 

  

1)              
Noted the forecast position for the West of England 
MCA Revenue Budget forecast as set out in Figures 1, 2 & 3 
including reserves, the forecast position for the Mayoral Revenue 
budget as set out in Figure 12 and the Capital forecast as set out 
in Figure 10; 

  

2)              
Noted the publication of the Mayoral Combined 
Authority Business Plan 2026/27 noting Appendix 12. 

Minutes:

This 
report set out the revenue and capital forecast for the West of 
England Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA) Committee for the 
financial year 2025/26 based on data from the period April 2025 to 
January 2026 for both the West of England MCA and Mayoral 
budgets. 

  

The 
report noted that the combined authority’s in-year forecast 
showed that the Authority was set to have invested just over 
£172 million in revenue and £210 million of capital 
across the region. This would enable the Authority to deliver its 
priority projects in key areas, including economic development, 
transport and in delivering programmes that advance the 
region’s environmental ambitions. 

  

Cllr 
Guy welcomed the report and in particular 
highlighted the importance of the £10.0m increase to 
the Programme Risk Reserve, which would safeguard the 
Authority’s position as it moved into the delivery stage of 
several large capital schemes, particularly in 
Transport. 

  

Cllr 
Tyrrell supported the proposals and highlighted the focus on 
transport delivery which would connect people with jobs, education 
etc across the region with cleaner, faster and more reliable travel 
and was essential to the long-term health of the regional 
economy.   Additionally she welcomed the collaboration on the 
West Innovation Arc and Spatial Development Strategy. 

  

Cllr 
Dyer stated that he felt it was a balanced and sustainable budget 
and hoped that any move towards an integrated settlement would lead 
to greater financial autonomy.   In 
respect to the draft Business Plan, attached at Appendix 10, he 
stated the importance of its alignment to the Growth 
Strategy. 

  

There were two recommendations set out in the report which were 
for noting.   The Committee indicated its 
assent for the recommendations. 

  

Resolved : 

  

The West of England Combined 
Authority Committee: 

  

1)              
Noted the forecast position for the West of England 
MCA Revenue Budget forecast as set out in Figures 1, 2 & 3 
including reserves, the forecast position for the Mayoral Revenue 
budget as set out in Figure 12 and the Capital forecast as set out 
in Figure 10; 

  

2)              
Noted the publication of the Mayoral Combined 
Authority Business Plan 2026/27 noting Appendix 12. 

9.

Investment Fund Programme and Grant Assurance PDF 321 KB 

To 
update on the overall Investment Fund (IF) programme and 
headroom. 

Decision:

The West of England Combined Authority 
Committee:

 

1)         Approved the 
Feasibility and Development Funding Application and the award of 
£742,500 for the Nature Recovery Workplan.

 

2)         Approved the 
Feasibility and Development Funding Application and the award of 
£205,000 for the Climate Resilience Workplan.

 

3)         Approved the 
Feasibility and Development Funding Application and the award of 
£1.3m for the Clean Energy Workplan.

 

4)         Approved the 
Feasibility and Development Funding Application and the award of 
£250,000 for West of England Housing Policy Development.

 

5)         Approved the 
Feasibility and Development Funding Application and the award of 
£1.71m for Regeneration Capacity which includes the award of 
£175k of grant funding to each of the four West of England 
Unitary Authorities.

 

6)         Approved the 
Feasibility and Development Funding Application and the award of 
£163,933 for the Clean Energy Solution for Live Events and 
TV/Film Pilot.

 

7)         Noted the 
return of £10m capital from the Green Growth West Fund to the 
Investment Fund headroom.

 

8) 
        
Noted the acceptance of a grant of £396,000 from the Ministry 
of Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) to support the 
development of the Brabazon & West Innovation Arc new town and 
delegates the finalisation of the detail of delivery to the West of 
England Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA) Director of Place in 
consultation with the Directors of Housing / Place of the Unitary 
Authorities. In the event of a consensus not being reached at 
Director level, decision making will be escalated to the West of 
England MCA’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO) in consultation 
with the Unitary Authority CEOs

 

9) 
        
Delegated the authority to the West of England Combined Authority 
Director of Operations, in consultation with equivalent Directors 
from the Unitary Authorities, to administer funds, deliver 
initiatives and the award of funding until 31st July 2027 under 
Adult Skills. In the event of a consensus not being reached at 
Director level, decision making will be escalated to the West of 
England Mayoral Combined Authority Chief Executive Officer (CEO) in 
consultation with the Unitary Authority CEOs.

 

10) 
      Delegated the 
authority to the West of England Combined Authority Director of 
Operations, in consultation with equivalent Directors from the 
Unitary Authorities, to administer funds, deliver initiatives and 
the award of funding until 31st March 2030 under the DfE funded 
programmes set out in paragraph 23. In the event of a consensus not 
being reached at Director level, decision making will be escalated 
to the West of England Mayoral Combined Authority Chief Executive 
Officer (CEO) in consultation with the Unitary Authority CEOs.

 

11) 
      Noted the 
intended receipt of £25m from the DCMS via the Creative 
Places Growth Fund and delegates the finalisation of the use of the 
funding, including grant giving, to the Mayoral Combined Authority 
Director of Strategy in consultation with the equivalent Directors 
from the Unitary Authorities. In the event of a consensus not being 
reached at Director level, decision making will be escalated to the 
West of England Mayoral Combined Authority Chief Executive Officer 
(CEO) in consultation with the Unitary Authority CEOs.

 

12) 
 ...  
view the full decision text for item 9. 

Minutes:

Mayor Godwin introduced a report which updated the Committee on 
the overall Investment Fund (IF) programme and headroom. 

  

The 
Mayor stated that the Investment Fund programmes included funding 
for nature recovery, climate resilience, and clean energy. The 
Nature Recovery programme would produce the country’s first 
regional Wildlife Index and State of Nature report. 

  

The 
Clean Energy programme would see an investment of £1.3 
million to develop clean energy proposals. The other two programmes 
in the paper focused on housing and regeneration, including the 
expansion of regeneration capacity through a total of £1.7 
million of new funding, including £175,000 for each local 
council. This funding would directly support the development of our 
five Growth Zones outlined in our Growth Strategy. 

  

The 
Housing Policy programme would support early master-planning work 
for the emerging Brabazon and West Innovation Arc New Town with 
£400,000 funding from MHCLG with a further £250,000 
commitment to support the housing policy development for the 
region. 

  

The 
Creative Places Growth Fund would allow an investment in the 
region’s creative sector through providing £25 million 
in funding over three years. 

  

Cllr 
Tyrrell commented that the Clean Energy programme would help 
address the grid capacity constraints in some areas and would 
support the retrofit and warm homes initiatives.   She also welcomed the development of a tidal 
energy proposition for the Severn Estuary, in partnership with 
Cardiff Capital Region and the opportunity to preserve land at 
Oldbury to retain a nuclear option on the site with the help of 
private investment.   She further 
welcomed the investment for Bottle Yard Studios but reminded the 
meeting of the studio facilities in Patchway which she hoped may be 
considered for future investment.   
Lastly she welcomed the new towns initiative for Brabazon 
and 

the 
West Innovation Arc. 

  

Cllr 
Dyer supported the report and highlighted in particular the 
region’s commitment to climate and nature and the clean 
energy for live events pilot and the Warm Homes Plan were 
especially welcomed.   He stated that the 
region’s experience in these areas should encourage the 
government to pilot other such schemes in the area. He also 
highlighted the work on Housing, Policy and Regeneration and stated 
that while it was important to grow the local economy the 
initiatives should also help to tackle inequality. 

  

Cllr 
Guy added his support but noted disappointment at the return of the 
£10m capital from the Green Growth West Fund to the 
Investment Fund headroom.   He felt that 
the West of England had the opportunity to lead the nation on green 
technology and green growth which would make a significant 
difference to the lives of the most deprived people in the 
region.   He mentioned the Heat from 
Mines, Somer Valley Green Business Park and hydroelectric power at 
Pulteney Weir. 

  

Cllr 
Gibbons stated that she supported this report and asked whether the 
Adult Skills Fund, the DfE funded programmes and the Creative 
Growth Fund would involve all local authorities in co-designing use 
of these funds.   She also asked about 
the Regional Skills Strategy and asked that  ...  

view the full minutes text for item 9. 

10.

Delivery Assurance PDF 189 KB 

To 
consider changes to schemes within the Investment Fund programme 
against the agreed delivery assurance principles. 

Decision:

The West of England Combined Authority 
Committee approved the change requests for schemes within the 
current Investment Fund programme as set out in Appendix 1.

Minutes:

This 
report asked the Committee to consider changes to schemes within 
the Investment Fund programme against the agreed delivery assurance 
principles. 

  

This 
report noted that there were a total of 20 projects that have 
submitted change requests, and, as requested at the 
Authority’s Overview and Scrutiny Committee in October, the 
report provided a short description of each project. 

  

The 
recommendations were moved by Cllr Dyer and seconded by Cllr 
Tyrrell. 

  

It 
was unanimously 

  

Resolved : 

  

The 
West of England Combined Authority Committee approved the change 
requests for schemes within the current Investment Fund programme 
as set out in Appendix 1. 

  

[There was a short comfort break following the consideration of 
this item]. 

11.

Social Value in Procurement and Contracts PDF 130 KB 

This 
paper formalises the West of England Mayoral Combined 
Authority’s (MCA) approach to Social Value in Procurements 
and Contracts. 

Additional documents:

Item 11A - Social Value in Procurement App 1 , item 11. 
PDF 3 MB 

Item 11B - Social Value in Procurement App 2 , item 11. 
PDF 508 KB 

Decision:

Committee noted the 
proposed approach to Social Value in Procurement and Contracts.

Minutes:

This 
paper formalised the West of England Mayoral Combined 
Authority’s (MCA) approach to Social Value in Procurements 
and Contracts by embedding Social Value principles in the 
Authority’s procurement and contracts. 

  

The 
Mayor, in introducing this item, stated that the updated Social 
Value Framework focused on three themes that were core to what the 
Authority was doing: 

  

Family and homes, which meant reducing child poverty, supporting 
children’s early years development, and strengthening early 
intervention in areas like homelessness; 

Economy and growth, through supporting people into work and 
reducing barriers to opportunity, and increasing VCSE and SME 
participation in supply chains; 

And 
nature and climate, which meant taking meaningful action to reduce 
pollution and support nature recovery, and creating more green 
communities. 

  

The 
Mayor stated that she believed that by embedding social value 
across spending mechanisms proportionately, which would include all 
above-threshold procurements, the Authority would be able to focus 
its efforts where its impact could be the greatest. It would also 
help us to foster effective, long-term relationships with the VCSE 
sector and delivery partners. 

  

The 
proposals were endorsed by the other leaders who felt this would be 
an important lever and tool for the Authority and indicated their 
consent for the proposal. 

  

Resolved : 

  

Committee noted the proposed approach to Social Value in 
Procurement and Contracts. 

12.

Forward Plan of Regional Strategic Work PDF 122 KB 

To 
receive a forward plan of regional strategic work outlining 
upcoming strategy launches, development activity and new programmes 
expected to begin in the next period. Forward plans are received at 
each meeting of the Committee (as required). 

Decision:

Committee noted the forward plan provided in 
this paper and provided steers on priorities and the direction of 
the work areas it contained.

Minutes:

The 
Committee received a report highlighting the forward plan of 
regional strategic work which outlined upcoming strategy launches, 
development activity and new programmes expected to begin in the 
next period. Forward plans were received at each meeting of the 
Committee (as required). 

  

The 
Mayor in her introduction stated that she believed there were five 
programmes set out in the forward plan of regional strategic work 
that are particularly important as follows: 

  

·        
The launch of the Investment Prospectus; 

·        
Spatial Development Strategy (SDS); 

·        
Development of the Skills Strategy; 

·        
The Transport Strategy; 

·        
the Bus Plan would outline the main objectives for 
improving our bus network 

  

Committee members were asked to note the recommendation and 
indicated their assent thereon. 

  

Cllr 
Guy gave his endorsement for the proposals, welcomed the additional 
transparency that this report brought and looked forward to the 
collaborative delivery of the schemes.   
These remarks were echoed by Cllr Tyrrell.   Cllr Guy also stated that the level of 
transparency and collaboration was due to the current Mayor’s 
leadership in this area. 

  

Cllr 
Dyer agreed that it was important to provide homes through the SDS, 
the right skills to do jobs through the Skills Strategy and provide 
means for those people to travel to those jobs with the investment 
into the area pulling all these strands together.   

  

Cllr 
Gibbons stated that it was an ambitious timeline set out but asked 
whether there were plans to have a more joined up spatial 
approach.   Mayor Godwin stated that the 
SDS was a regional plan but the Authority would also look at each 
growth zone in turn and the informal governance around that such as 
the North Somerset Growth Gateway.     

  

Resolved : 

  

Committee noted the forward plan provided in this paper and 
provided steers on priorities and the direction of the work areas 
it contained. 

13.

Transport PDF 405 KB 

To 
provide an update to the West of England Mayoral Combined Authority 
(MCA) Committee and to secure approval from Committee on an 
appropriate delegated authority, ensuring decisions are reached in 
a timely manner. 

Decision:

Committee:

  

1) 
        
Delegated authority to the West of England Combined 
Authority’s Executive Director of Transport, in consultation 
with the equivalent unitary authority Directors, to issue a tender, 
award a contract, and establish contract and operational management 
arrangements for the next Integrated Micromobility Service 
contract. In the event of a consensus not being reached at Director 
level, decision making to be escalated to the West of England 
Combined Authority’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO) in 
consultation with the unitary authority CEOs, as detailed in 
paragraph 1 – 23.

  

2)         Noted the 
submission of the detailed draft Local Transport Delivery 
Plan.   

  

3)         Noted the 
outcome of the CRSTS re-baseline exercise.

  

4) 
        
Delegated authority, to the West of England Combined 
Authority’s Executive Director for Transport in consultation 
with the West of England Combined Authority S73 Officer, equivalent 
Directors from the Unitary Authorities, and S151 Officers from the 
Unitary Authorities for the approval of all remaining CRSTS change 
requests. In the event of a consensus not being reached at Director 
level, decision making to be escalated to the Mayoral Combined 
Authority’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO) in consultation 
with the Unitary Authority CEOs, as detailed in paragraphs 58 - 87. 
In the event of a consensus not being reached at Chief Executive 
Officer level, decision making to be escalated to the 
Committee.

 

5)          
Delegated authority to the West of England Combined 
Authority’s Executive Director for Transport in consultation 
with the West of England Combined Authority S73 Officer, equivalent 
Directors from the Unitary Authorities, and S151 Officers from the 
Unitary Authorities, for the approval of all remaining CRSTS 
business cases. In the event of a consensus not being reached at 
Director level, decision making to be escalated to the Mayoral 
Combined Authority’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO) in 
consultation with the Unitary Authority CEOs as detailed in 
paragraphs 58 - 87. In the event of a consensus not being reached 
at Chief Executive Officer level, decision making to be escalated 
to the Committee.   

Minutes:

This 
report provided an update on key transport schemes to the West of 
England Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA) Committee across the rail, 
bus, road and active travel networks in the region as well as 
developing mass transit plans alongside these. 

  

Mayor Godwin, in introducing this item stated that she believed 
that the Transport Vision was a clear signal that the Authority was 
working towards delivering across the region’s rail, bus, 
road, and active travel networks, whilst developing mass transit 
plans by progressing work in the CRSTS and Transport for City 
Regions, or TCR, programmes. 

  

The 
report also set out details for the re-procurement of the e-bike 
and e-scooter contract to ensure that residents could choose to 
continue to use these services, whilst building in more measures to 
better ensure that the scheme operated effectively and 
responsibly. 

  

The 
paper also noted the submission of the draft TCR delivery plan, a 
major step towards delivering the ambition set out in the transport 
vision. 

  

The 
paper further outlined the funding allocations for the CRSTS 
programme, after DfT had approved the proposal. This now followed 
the re-baselining of the programme, details of which had been 
brought to the last meeting of this Committee. 

  

The 
report also requested approval from Committee to agree an 
appropriate delegated authority to ensure decisions could be 
reached in a timely manner. 

  

Cllr 
Dyer highlighted the importance of this report and stated that he 
believed that the allocated funds could be spent two or three times 
over not just due to the scale of the projects but also due to the 
need to move quickly. Collaboration would be essential in moving 
forward at the planned pace and in getting the details 
correct.   He highlighted the importance 
of active travel being a part of any workable transport network and 
providing as many different alternatives as possible for the 
public. 

  

Cllr 
Guy endorsed these comments and added that this was a significant 
step forward in cross-border collaboration on connectivity of the 
transport network in the region.   He 
stated that the Transport Advisory Board had asked for 25% 
overprogramming to be included to provide some flexibility within 
the budget and the Board would focus on the details going 
forward. 

  

Cllr 
Tyrrell welcomed the balance between the essential maintenance and 
the active travel and the major schemes.   She highlighted the plans for orbital routes to 
join the major growth areas in Bristol, Bath and the growth zones 
and felt the significance of recognising the importance of these 
areas and the importance of linking rural areas for people to 
access work, education etc. 

  

Cllr 
Gibbons stated that this was a crucial plan for North Somerset 
which, although not part of TCR was integral to the 
Authority’s growth strategy, with North Somerset aligning 
with the schemes to help be part of the region’s 
growth.   In terms of micromobility, 
although North Somerset had no plans to introduce that currently, 
it was part of its local plan to be embedded for future 
developments. 

  

The 
recommendations were moved by  ...  view the 
full minutes text for item 13. 

14.

Joint Committee Budget Forecast 2025/26 PDF 208 KB 

This 
report represents the revenue and capital forecast of the West of 
England Joint Committee budgets for the financial year 2025/26 
based on data from the period April 2025 to January 2026. Change 
request approvals are also included as part of this reporting 
process. 

Decision:

The West of England Joint Committee:

 

1) 
        
Noted the Revised Analysis of External Grants as at the end of 
January 2026 as set out in Appendix 2; The Revenue Forecast as set 
out in Appendix 1 and the Capital Forecast as set out in Appendix 
3.

 

2) 
        
Approved the reallocation and reprofiling of Bristol City Council 
EDF allocations as set out in Figure 5.

 

3) 
        
Approved the change requests for schemes in the Economic 
Development Fund (EDF) and Revolving Infrastructure Fund (RIF) 
programmes as set out in Appendix 4.

Minutes:

[Joint Committee item] 

  

This 
report represented the revenue and capital forecast of the West of 
England Joint Committee budgets for the financial year 2025/26 
based on data from the period April 2025 to January 2026. Change 
request approvals were also included as part of this reporting 
process. 

  

The 
recommendations were moved by Cllr Guy and seconded by Cllr 
Gibbons. 

  

[Voting arrangements Recommendation 1: None required - 
Recommendation was for noting with any comments. Recommendation 2 
and 3: Was to be determined by a majority of those Members in 
attendance, or their substitutes (one vote representing each 
Authority) and excluding the West of England Mayoral Combined 
Authority Mayor]. 

  

Resolved : 

  

The 
West of England Joint Committee: 

  

1)       Noted the Revised Analysis 
of External Grants as at the end of January 2026 as set out in 
Appendix 2; The Revenue Forecast as set out in Appendix 1 and the 
Capital Forecast as set out in Appendix 3. 

  

2)       Approved the reallocation 
and reprofiling of Bristol City Council EDF allocations as set out 
in Figure 5. 

  

3)       Approved the change 
requests for schemes in the Economic Development Fund (EDF) and 
Revolving Infrastructure Fund (RIF) programmes as set out in 
Appendix 4. 

15.

Spatial Development Strategy PDF 229 KB 

Following the draft National 
Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) that was published for 
consultation by the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local 
Government (MHCLG) in December 2025, this paper seeks to further 
define the scope of the Spatial Development Strategy 
(SDS). 

Decision:

The West of England 
Joint Committee:

 

1)         Approved the 
proposed 30-year time period for the SDS.

 

2)         Noted the 
draft vision for the SDS.

 

3) 
        
Noted the draft Matters of Strategic Importance (MOSIs) to be 
covered by the SDS.

 

4) 
        
Noted that the MCA and North Somerset will work with MHCLG to 
establish a Strategic Planning Board as the formal decision-making 
body for the SDS. The Strategic Planning Board’s Terms of 
Reference would ultimately be set out in accordance with secondary 
legislation due to be laid by MHCLG later this spring under the 
Planning and Infrastructure Act 2025.

 

5) 
        
Noted the acceptance of the grant of £1,553,846 from the 
Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) to 
support the development of the SDS.

 

6) 
        
Delegated the finalisation of the detail of delivery of the new 
MHCLG grant to the West of England Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA) 
Director of Place in consultation with the Directors of Housing / 
Place of the Unitary Authorities. In the event of a consensus not 
being reached at Director level, decision making to be escalated to 
the West of England MCA’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO) in 
consultation with the Unitary Authority CEOs.

Minutes:

[Joint Committee item] 

  

Following the draft National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) 
that was published for consultation by the Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) in December 2025, this 
paper sought to further define the scope of the Spatial Development 
Strategy (SDS). 

  

The 
Mayor stated in her introduction to this item that the SDS would be 
a comprehensive plan to guide how the West of England would grow in 
the future. Following consultation with government, the Authority 
wanted to make sure that the SDS had progressed by the end of the 
current Parliament, and this paper would be important in 
determining the core scope of future work and funding. 

  

The 
SDS was an opportunity to plan how the coming decades would unfold, 
as the region worked to deliver on the ambitions outlined in the 
Growth Strategy. To support this crucial work, the Authority had 
secured a grant of some £1.6 million. This work would also 
factor in how to protect the region’s landscapes and 
biodiversity, restore nature, and strengthen its climate 
resilience. 

  

Cllr 
Dyer welcomed the progress made in relation to a regional 
development plan and would help to forecast future behaviour and 
therefore affordable housing and transport links and by looking 
beyond local authority boundaries.   

  

Cllr 
Guy supported the proposals and stated that it was important that 
the SDS supported and added value to local plans that were either 
already in existence or were being worked upon.   He stated that while connections between Bath and 
Bristol were vital, with Saltford Station a vital component, it was 
also important to recognise the rural nature of parts of the region 
and preservation of green corridors would be vital any 
SDS. 

  

In 
response Mayor Godwin stated that it was important to encourage 
these rural areas to flourish. 

  

Cllr 
Tyrrell welcomed the work that was being done and said that each 
area was at a different stage with their local plans with South 
Gloucestershire just about to enter examination in public 
stage.   She felt that the work that had 
already been carried out by the UAs had been recognised and could 
be pulled together for a regional plan.   
The long term vision would be important as the region moved through 
the plan over the next few years and she looked forward to the 
further work that would be carried out. 

  

Cllr 
Gibbons echoed the earlier comments and stated that as this would 
be a plan for the next 10, 20, 30 years it was important to engage 
with young people regarding its proposals.   She welcomed the collaboration on this 
policy. 

  

The 
recommendations were moved by Cllr Gibbons and seconded by Cllr 
Tyrrell. 

  

[Voting arrangements: To be determined by a majority of those 
Members in attendance, or their substitutes (one vote representing 
each Authority) and excluding the West of England Mayoral Combined 
Authority Mayor]. 

  

Resolved : 

  

The 
West of England Joint Committee: 

  

1) 
      Approved the 
proposed 30-year time period for the SDS. 

  

2) 
      Noted the 
draft vision for the SDS. 

  

3)       Noted the  ...  

view the full minutes text for item 15. 

 

Calendar 

Committee information 

Constitution 

Decisions 

Officer decisions 

Forward plans 

Library 

Meetings 

Search documents 

Subscribe to updates 

What's New 

Return to main site 

© Civica UK Ltd.
