The Road User Charging and Workplace Parking Levy (Net Proceeds) (England) Regulations 2003 

Skip to main content 
Skip to navigation 
legislation.gov.uk 
https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk Cymraeg 

Home 
Explore our collections 
Research tools 
Help and guidance 
What's new 
About us 
Search Legislation 

Search Legislation
Title: (or keywords in the title) 
Year: 
Number: 
Type: All UK Legislation (excluding originating from the EU) -------------------------------------------- All Legislation (including originating from EU) -------------------------------------------- All Legislation originating from the EU that is amended by the UK -------------------------------------------- All Primary Legislation     UK Public General Acts     UK Local Acts     UK Private and Personal Acts     Acts of the Scottish Parliament     Acts of Senedd Cymru     Acts of the National Assembly for Wales     Measures of the National Assembly for Wales     Church Measures     Acts of the Northern Ireland Assembly     Acts of the Old Scottish Parliament     Acts of the English Parliament     Acts of the Old Irish Parliament     Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Local Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Private and Personal Acts of the Parliament of Great Britain     Northern Ireland Orders in Council     Measures of the Northern Ireland Assembly     Acts of the Northern Ireland Parliament -------------------------------------------- All Secondary Legislation     UK Statutory Instruments     Welsh Statutory Instruments     Scottish Statutory Instruments     Northern Ireland Statutory Rules     Church Instruments     UK Ministerial Directions     UK Ministerial Orders     UK Statutory Rules and Orders     Northern Ireland Statutory Rules and Orders -------------------------------------------- All Legislation originating from the EU     Regulations originating from the EU     Regulations originating from the EU that are amended by the UK     Decisions originating from the EU     Decisions originating from the EU that are amended by the UK     Directives originating from the EU     European Union Treaties -------------------------------------------- All Draft Legislation     UK Draft Statutory Instruments     Scottish Draft Statutory Instruments     Northern Ireland Draft Statutory Rules -------------------------------------------- All Impact Assessments     UK Impact Assessments 
Search 
Advanced Search 
The Road User Charging and Workplace Parking Levy (Net Proceeds) (England) Regulations 2003
You are here:
UK Statutory Instruments 
2003 No. 110 
Whole
Instrument

Table of Contents 
Content 
More Resources 
Previous 
Next 

Plain View 
Print Options 

What Version

Latest available (Revised) 
Original (As made) 

Opening Options

Open whole Instrument 

More Resources

Original: King's Printer Version 

View more 

Status:
This is the original version (as it was originally made). This item of legislation is currently only available in its original format.

Statutory Instruments
2003 No. 110
ROAD TRAFFIC
ENGLAND
The Road User Charging and Workplace Parking Levy (Net Proceeds) (England) Regulations 2003
Made
24th January 2003

Laid before Parliament
24th January 2003

Coming into force
17th February 2003

The Secretary of State for Transport, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 420(1) of, and paragraph 1(2) of Schedule 23 and paragraph 1(2) of Schedule 24 to, the Greater London Authority Act 1999( 1 ), and by section 197(1) of, and paragraph 2(2) of Schedule 12 to, the Transport Act 2000( 2 ), and of all other powers enabling him in that behalf, hereby makes the following Regulations: 

Citation, commencement, extent and interpretation
1. —(1) These Regulations may be cited as the Road User Charging and Workplace Parking Levy (Net Proceeds) (England) Regulations 2003 and shall come into force on 17th February 2003. 
(2) These Regulations only apply to England. 
(3) In these Regulations— 
“proper practices” means those accounting practices— 
(a)
which the charging authority or licensing authority are required to follow by virtue of any enactment; or 

(b)
which, whether by reference to any generally recognised published code or otherwise, are regarded as proper accounting practices to be followed in the keeping of the accounts of charging authorities or licensing authorities, either generally or of the description concerned; 

but, in the event of any conflict in any respect between the practices falling within paragraph (a) above and those falling within paragraph (b) above, only those falling within paragraph (a) above are to be regarded as proper practices; and 
“relevant scheme” means— 
(a)
a relevant scheme as defined in paragraph 1(1) of Schedule 12 to the Transport Act 2000; or 

(b)
a charging scheme as defined in paragraph 1(1) of Schedule 23 or a licensing scheme as defined in paragraph 1(1) of Schedule 24 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999. 

Determination of net proceeds
2. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this regulation, for the purposes of Schedules 23 and 24 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 and paragraph 2 of Schedule 12 to the Transport Act 2000— 
(a) the amounts received under or in connection with a relevant scheme; 
(b) the expenses incurred for or in connection with a relevant scheme; and 
(c) the extent to which such amounts or expenses are attributable to any financial year, 
shall be determined on an accruals basis including appropriate allowance for— 
(i) the depreciation and impairment of fixed assets; 
(ii) the charging of deferred charges to revenue account; and 
(iii) capital financing charges. 
(2) Such amounts received and expenses incurred shall include amounts of interest calculated respectively on the credit balances and the debit balances. 
(3) Such balances shall be calculated by deducting from the amounts received attributable to a financial year up to the end of the day in question the sum of— 
(a) the expenses referred to in paragraph (1)(b); and 
(b) the net proceeds applied under paragraph 8 of Schedule 12 to the Transport Act 2000, or paragraph 16 of Schedule 23 or paragraph 22 of Schedule 24 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 (as the case may be), 
in either case attributable to the same period. 
(4) Subject as aforesaid, the calculations shall be made in accordance with proper practices. 
Signed by authority of the Secretary of State 
John Spellar
Minister of State,
Department for Transport
24th January 2003

Explanatory Note
(This note is not part of the Regulations) 
These Regulations only apply to England. They make provision about the requirements for charging and licensing authorities to determine the net proceeds of road user charging and workplace parking levy schemes for the purposes of paragraph 1(2) of Schedules 23 and 24 to the Greater London Authority Act 1999 and paragraph 2 of Schedule 12 to the Transport Act 2000. 
Regulation 2(1) provides for amounts received and expenses incurred in respect of a relevant scheme and the extent to which they are attributable to any financial year to be determined on an accruals basis including appropriate allowance for depreciation and impairment of fixed assets, charging of deferred charges to revenue account and capital financing charges (which are commonly known as cost of capital charges). 
Regulation 2(2) provides for interest to be earned on the credit balances and payable on the debit balances. 
Regulation 2(3) provides that such balances shall be calculated by deducting from the amounts received attributable to the financial year up to the end of the day in question the expenses relating to the relevant scheme and the net proceeds applied under the relevant statutory provisions attributable to the same period. 
Regulation 2(4) provides that, subject to the above-mentioned matters, the calculations are to be made in accordance with “proper practices”. The term “proper practices” is defined in regulation 1(3), the definition being based on that in section 66(4) of the Local Government and Housing Act 1989. 
( 1 )
1999 c. 29 . 

( 2 )
2000 c. 38 . The Secretary of State is “the appropriate national authority” as respects England: see section 198(1). 

Previous 
Next 

Back to top 

Options/Help
Print Options
Official printed copies
Order a copy of this legislation buy now 

Print The Whole
Instrument
PDF The Whole
Instrument 
Web page The Whole
Instrument 

Legislation is available in different versions:
Latest Available (revised): The latest available updated version of the legislation incorporating changes made by subsequent legislation and applied by our editorial team. Changes we have not yet applied to the text, can be found in the ‘Changes to Legislation’ area.
Original (As Enacted or Made): The original version of the legislation as it stood when it was enacted or made. No changes have been applied to the text.

Opening Options
Different options to open legislation in order to view more content on screen at once

More Resources
Access essential accompanying documents and information for this legislation item from this tab. Dependent on the legislation item being viewed this may include:
the original print PDF of the as enacted version that was used for the print copy
lists of changes made by and/or affecting this legislation item
confers power and blanket amendment details
all formats of all associated documents
correction slips
links to related legislation and further information resources

More Resources
Use this menu to access essential accompanying documents and information for this legislation item. Dependent on the legislation item being viewed this may include:
the original print PDF of the as made version that was used for the print copy
correction slips

Click 'View More' or select 'More Resources' tab for additional information including:
lists of changes made by and/or affecting this legislation item
confers power and blanket amendment details
all formats of all associated documents
links to related legislation and further information resources

The data on this page is available in the alternative data formats listed: HTML5 alternative version 
HTML snippet alternative version 
PDF alternative version 
XML alternative version 
Akoma Ntoso alternative version 
HTML RDFa alternative version 
RDF/XML alternative version 

New site design 
Help 
About us 
Site map 
Accessibility 
Contact us 
Privacy notice 
Cookies 

All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated . This site additionally contains content derived from EUR-Lex, reused under the terms of the Commission Decision 2011/833/EU on the reuse of documents from the EU institutions. For more information see the EUR-Lex public statement on re-use . 
© Crown and database right
