Public Document Pack

Transport and Connectivity
Policy Committee
Agenda

Date: Thursday, 12 September 2024
Time: 5.00 pm
Venue: The Council Chamber - City Hall, College
Green, Bristol, BS1 5TR

Distribution:
Councillors: Ed Plowden (Chair), Graham Morris (Vice-Chair), Donald Alexander, Rob Bryher,
Nicholas Coombes, Tim Rippington, Emma Edwards, Kaz Self and David Wilcox.

Issued by: Policy Committee Team
City Hall, College Green, Bristol BS1 5TR
E-mail: policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk
Date: Wednesday, 4 September 2024
Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee – Agenda

Agenda
1. Welcome, Introductions and Safety Information
(Pages 5 - 7)
2. Apologies for Absence and Substitutions

3. Declarations of Interest
To note any declarations of interest from councillors. They are asked to
indicate the relevant agenda item, the nature of the interest and in particular
whether it is a disclosable pecuniary interest.

Any declaration of interest made at the meeting which is not on the register of
interests should be notified to the Monitoring Officer for inclusion.

4. Minutes of the Previous Meeting
(Pages 8 - 15)
5. Chair's Announcements
To receive any announcements from the Chair.

6. Public Forum
Up to 30 minutes is allowed for this item.

Any member of the public or councillor may participate in Public Forum. Public
Forum items must relate to the remit of the committee and should be addressed
to the Chair of the committee.

Members of the public who plan to attend a public meeting at City Hall are
advised that you will be required to sign in when you arrive. Please note that you
will be issued with a visitor pass which you will need to display at all times.

Please also note:

Questions
1. Written public questions must be received by 5.00 pm, at least 3 clear
working days prior to the meeting. For this meeting, this means that
questions must be received at the latest by 5.00 pm on Friday 6
September. Please email questions to policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk
2. Any individual can submit up to 3 written questions.
Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee – Agenda

3. Written replies to questions will be available on the Council’s website at
least one hour before the meeting.
4. At the meeting, questioners will be permitted to ask up to 2 oral
supplementary questions.

Statements
1. Written statements must be received at latest by 12.00 noon, at least 2
working days prior to the meeting. For this meeting, this means that
statements must be received at the latest by 12.00 noon on Tuesday 10
September. Please email statements to policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk
2. Statements, provided they are no more than 1,000 words in length, will
be circulated to all committee members and will be published on the
Council’s website at least one hour before the meeting.

Petitions
1. Details of the wording of any petitions, and the number of signatories to
petitions must be received at latest by 12.00 noon, at least 2 working days
prior to the meeting. For this meeting, this means that petition details
must be received at the latest by 12.00 noon on Tuesday 10 September.
Please email petition details to policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk
2. At the meeting, individuals presenting petitions may be required to read
out the objectives of the petition.

When submitting a question or statement please indicate whether you are planning
to attend the meeting to present your statement ask your question

7. Opportunities to promote sustainable transport through a
review of parking policies and charges
1. Within the context of Bristol’s Transport Policy, the Council needs to consider a (Pages 16 - 90)
range of initiatives to further improve air quality and make more efficient use of
on and off street, public car parking spaces, whilst considering how the
management of these spaces can help driver behaviour change towards
sustainable modes of travel. There is a need to maximise the use of kerb space,
given increasing demands for car clubs, cycle hangars, scooter parking and EV
(Electric Vehicle) charging, all set alongside a range of other uses such as pocket
parklets, trees and commercial use through licensing.
2. The evidence base outlines proposals to make changes to parking charges to
keep up with inflation, to rationalise any anomalies and to ensure that the cost of
the first Residents’ Parking Permit covers the full cost of current operations.
3. The report also notes the need for an integrated approach and recommends
setting up a Task and Finish Group to develop and deliver a holistic Parking and
Kerbside Strategy.
4. This paper seeks the Committee’s approval to implement these recommended
proposals and provides other options considered.
Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee – Agenda

8. Supported Bus Services Priorities Task and Finish Group
To establish a member Task and Finish Group for Supported Bus Services, and (Pages 91 - 95)
associated Terms of Reference.

9. Bristol Regional Cycling Hub, Lawrence Weston
To apprise the Committee of the proposed Bristol Regional Cycling Hub (BRCH) in (Pages 96 - 150)
Lawrence Weston and seek its approval for expenditure to develop the business
case and submit a full planning application. To ensure efficient and effective
delivery of this project before the City Region Sustainable Transport Settlement
(CRSTS) spending deadline of March 2027, funding needs to be allocated and
approved in a timely manner.

10. Workplace Parking Levy
This report sets out the current thinking around how a Workplace Parking Levy (Pages 151 - 252)
would work and what it would need to deliver it and seeks approval to allocate
funding for development of the business case for the scheme.

11. 2024/25 P3 Finance Forecast Report - Transport & Connectivity
The Council Revenue and Capital budget for 2024/25 was agreed by Full Council (Pages 253 - 256)
on 21 February 2023. This report presents to the Transport and Connectivity
Committee the transport financial forecast at Period 3 (P3) against the budget as
at the end of June 2024. P3 was an exception reporting month meaning the
Council only reported material changes in the forecast.

12. Q1 2024/25 Corporate Risk Report - Transport and Connectivity
The report provides an update on current significant strategic risks to achieving (Pages 257 - 265)
the
Council’s objectives, within the Transport and Connectivity Committee, as set in
the Corporate Strategy 2022-2027 and summarises progress in managing the
risks and actions being taken as at Quarter 1_2024-25.
Agenda Item 1
www.bristol.gov.uk

Public Information Sheet
Inspection of Papers - Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985

You can find papers for all our meetings on our website at www.bristol.gov.uk.

Public meetings for Policy Committees are held at City Hall.

Attendance at Public meetings

Bristol City Council welcomes public attendance and participation at all of its formal committee
meetings. When attending public meetings please behave with courtesy, tolerance and respect at
all times to Councillors, Council Officers and other meeting participants. Attendees who cause
disturbance may be asked to leave or, may be removed from the meeting.

If you’re a member of the press or public and want to attend a public meeting at City Hall, you will
need to sign in when you arrive. You will be issued with a visitor pass which you will need to
display at all times.

Due to the maximum occupancy of the venue, you may be asked to watch the meeting on a screen
in another room.

Other formats and languages and assistance for those with hearing impairment
Other o check with and
You can get committee papers in other formats (e.g. large print, audio tape, braille etc) or in
community languages by contacting the Policy Committee Officer. Please give as much notice as
possible. We cannot guarantee re-formatting or translation of papers before the date of a
particular meeting.

Committee rooms are fitted with induction loops to assist people with hearing impairment. If you
require any assistance with this please speak to the Policy Committee Officer.

Public Forum
Members of the public may make a written statement, ask a question, or present a petition to
most meetings. Please ensure that any submissions made are respectful, factual, and relevant.

• By contributing to the public forum process the participant acknowledges that any content
submitted is at the authors own risk and the Council disclaims any obligation or
responsibility for it.
• Questions, Statements and Petitions should be factually based and should not contain
anything that could be construed as being defamatory, frivolous or offensive. Any

Page 5
www.bristol.gov.uk

submission including such information shall be redacted prior to publication without notice
to the author.
• The Council reserves the right to reject any submission it deems defamatory, frivolous or
offensive at its sole discretion.
• Sensitive personal information may be deleted or redacted
• Officer’s names below Head of Service, will be replaced by the Officer’s job title
• Company names may be deleted or redacted

Your statement or question will be sent to the Committee Members and will be published on the
Council’s website before the meeting. Please send it to policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

The following requirements apply:

• The statement is received no later than 12.00 noon two working days before the meeting and
is about a matter which is the responsibility of the committee concerned.
• The question is received no later than 5pm three clear working days before the meeting.

Any statement submitted should be no longer than one side of A4 paper. For copyright reasons,
we are unable to reproduce or publish newspaper or magazine articles that may be attached to
statements.

By participating in public forum business, we will assume that you have consented to your name
and the details of your submission being recorded and circulated to the Committee and published
within the minutes. Your statement or question will also be made available to the public via
publication on the Council’s website and may be provided upon request in response to Freedom of
Information Act requests in the future.

We will try to remove personal and identifiable information. However, because of time
constraints we cannot guarantee this, and you may therefore wish to consider if your statement
contains information that you would prefer not to be in the public domain. Other committee
papers may be placed on the council’s website and information within them may be searchable on
the internet.

During the meeting:

• Public Forum is normally one of the first items on the agenda, although statements and
petitions that relate to specific items on the agenda may be taken just before the item
concerned.
• There will be no debate on statements or petitions.
• The Chair will call each submission in turn. When you are invited to speak, please make sure
that your presentation focuses on the key issues that you would like Members to consider.
This will have the greatest impact.
• Your time allocation may have to be strictly limited if there are a lot of submissions. This may
be as short as one minute.
• If there are a large number of submissions on one matter a representative may be requested
to speak on the groups behalf.

Page 6
www.bristol.gov.uk

• If you do not attend or speak at the meeting at which your public forum submission is being
taken your statement will be noted by Members.
• Under our security arrangements, please note that members of the public (and bags) may be
searched. This may apply in the interests of helping to ensure a safe meeting environment for
all attending.
• As part of the drive to reduce single-use plastics in council-owned buildings, please bring your
own water bottle in order to fill up from the water dispenser.

For further information about procedure rules please refer to our Constitution
https://www.bristol.gov.uk/how-council-decisions-are-made/constitution

Webcasting/ Recording of meetings

Members of the public attending meetings or taking part in Public forum are advised that Policy
Committee meetings may be filmed for live or subsequent broadcast via the council's webcasting
pages. The whole of the meeting is filmed (except where there are confidential or exempt
items). If you ask a question or make a representation, then you are likely to be filmed and will be
deemed to have given your consent to this. If you do not wish to be filmed you need to make
yourself known to the webcasting staff. However, the Openness of Local Government Bodies
Regulations 2014 now means that persons attending meetings may take photographs, film and
audio record the proceedings and report on the meeting (Oral commentary is not permitted
during the meeting as it would be disruptive). Members of the public should therefore be aware
that they may be filmed by others attending and that is not within the council’s control.

Our privacy notice can be viewed at www.bristol.gov.uk/about-our-website/privacy-and-
processing-notices-for-resource-services

Page 7
Agenda Item 4

Bristol City Council
Minutes of the Transport and Connectivity Policy
Committee

11 July 2024 at 5.00 pm

Members Present:-
Councillors: Ed Plowden (Chair), Graham Morris (Vice-Chair), Donald Alexander, Rob Bryher,
Nicholas Coombes, Tim Rippington, Emma Edwards, Kaz Self and David Wilcox

Officers in Attendance:-

1 Welcome, Introductions and Safety Information

The Chair welcomed all attendees to the meeting and explained the emergency evacuation procedure.

The Chair asked the Committee members to introduce themselves.

2 Apologies for Absence and Substitutions

There were none.

3 Declarations of Interest

The following interests were declared by members:
- The Chair advised that he was employed at ‘Sustrans’ until the end of July and that he was a member of
the Bristol Cycling Campaign.
- Cllr Wilcox advised that he was a member of the Bristol Cycling Campaign.
- Cllr Morris advised that he was a member of the South Bristol Sports Centre Trust (premises on no. 2 bus
route).
- Cllr Bryher advised that he was a member of the Bristol Cycling Campaign.
- Cllr Self advised that she was a Trustee of Southmead Development Trust (premises on no. 2 bus route).

Page 8
democractic.services@bristol.gov.uk

4 Chair's Announcements

The Chair highlighted this was the first meeting of the Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee under
the new committee governance system and that he was looking forward to working together with other
members in a cross-party and progressive way.

Key issues for the Committee to consider and address included:
- decarbonising the city for improved public health.
- demand management i.e. seeking the right balance for helping people getting round the city.
- engaging with people, including seeking out ‘less heard’ voices.
- ensuring equality and diversity must be at the heart of the approach.
- reinforcing the need for strong evidence bases to inform decisions, some of which could involve difficult
choices.

5 Public Forum

The Committee noted that the following Public Forum had been received.

Public Forum Questions:

Questions 1 and 2: Councillor Rob Bryher – contractors, roadworks.
Questions 3 and 4: Ian Pond, Bristol Cycling Campaign – Nelson Street, University Road
Questions 5, 6 and 7: Matt Sanders – Cumberland Road warning letters, SSGB ‘honey trap’, junction
priorities at bus gates
Questions 8, 9 and 10: Nicholas Davies – CRSTS schemes and engagement
Questions 11 and 12: Suzanne Audrey, Chair of TRESA – Item 8 - Strategic Corridors update

Those who attended the meeting asked the following supplementary questions:

Ian Pond:
A) Nelson Street: reassurances were requested about the concerns raised about the narrowness of the
path as referred to in his question and the need for monitoring. Officers took note of this.

B) University Road: clarification was sought about whether the TRO was temporary or permanent. The
Chair said he was happy to see the TRO to reopen the road had not been taken forward. Officers
confirmed the modal filter was permanent but that there was still temporary material at the location.

Matt Sanders:

Page 9
democractic.services@bristol.gov.uk

A) Asked why some of the work had not been completed as part of the main installation. Officers
advised it was because these were different types of work and could not be completed at the same
time.

B) Asked whether the current ‘no left turn’ signage for visitors leaving the SS Great Britain was too small,
i.e. insufficiently visible. Officers confirmed that the signage was the correct size sign. It was noted
that it was important for drivers to be able to clearly recognise signage around bus gates.

Nicholas Davies:
A) Queried whether the schemes put forward for CRSTS funding were sufficiently ambitious and whether
more could be done for this level of funding. The Chair responded that the schemes would allow the
Council to get to the position from which it could then start to deliver the bigger schemes that were
needed by the city.

B) Asked about why there was no preliminary consultation with key stakeholders before it was decided
what work would be carried out on the Portway. The Chair responded that the stakeholder lists
needed to be updated but the Council would be engaging fully and early with many groups including
the Bristol Cycling Campaign and Walking Alliance. Officers said that they had responded to the group
to say a shared path was in their view acceptable and they were developing the most appropriate
scheme for all users.

Public Forum Statements

Statements were received as follows:
 Statement 1: Matt Sanders
 Statement 2: Christina Biggs
 Statement 3: David Redgewell

There was a short discussion about fare structures and the Chair agreed to look into this further after the
meeting, noting though that this was primarily a Combined Authority matter.

The Committee noted the public forum details, also noting that relevant content would be taken into
account as part of their consideration of the relevant agenda items later at this meeting.

6 Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee Annual Business Report 2024-25

The Committee considered the Annual Business Report for 2024/2025.

Members engaged in a short discussion about potential topics for and timing of a Task and Finish
Group(s) going forwards. It was suggested that a kerbside and parking strategy could be a beneficial topic
to pursue. Bus franchising was suggested as a potential later Task and Finish Group topic.

Page 10
democractic.services@bristol.gov.uk

The Committee RESOLVED:

1. To note the membership of the Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee for 2024/25.
2. To note the appointment of Cllr Ed Plowden as the Chair of the Transport and Connectivity Policy
Committee for 2024/25.
3. To note the appointment of Cllr Graham Morris as the Vice-Chair of the Transport and Connectivity
Policy Committee for 2024/25.
4. To note the terms of reference of the Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee.
5. To note the Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee’s meeting dates for 2024/25.

7 Upgrade of electrical power supplies on the Amphitheatre Event space

The Committee considered a report that sought approval for capital funding to install a power supply on
the Amphitheatre site.

This Chair stated this was a key decision because it involved spend of more than £500k; officers confirmed
that £800k expenditure was required in respect of this proposal.

Summary of main points raised / noted in discussion of this item:

1. It was confirmed that this funding was essentially corporate prudential borrowing.

2. It was confirmed that the detailed design of the scheme would take place during this financial year,
with installation during the next financial year.

3. This work represented an ‘upgrading’ of the power supply but there was also an important health and
safety issue that would be addressed through this approach.

4. This investment would also increase the scope for holding more events at the location over time. The
running costs would be cheaper as well, which should also assist the Council’s ability to hold more locally
organised events.

5. A question was raised about whether the proposal would form part of the electricity sleeving
approach. Officers advised that the intention was for highways to be included in the sleeving
arrangements going forwards.

6. It was agreed that it was important to set the right level of charging and that officers would look to
obtain optimum prices.

7. It was suggested that local discounts should be considered for events run by local people/groups.

Page 11
democractic.services@bristol.gov.uk

The Committee RESOLVED (unanimously):

1. To approve the spend of the allocated capital funding of £800k to upgrade electrical power supplies
and improve electrical installations on the Amphitheatre Event site as outlined in the report.

2. To authorise the Executive Director: Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of the
Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee, to procure and award the contract to deliver the
proposals, in line with the procurement routes and maximum budget envelopes outlined in the report.

8 Strategic Corridors update and delivery of City Centre project

The Committee considered a report that provided an update on the Strategic Corridors programme and
sought approval from the Committee to accept and spend additional funding:

a) to deliver the development and submission to the West of England Combined
Authority (WECA) of Business Cases for the City Centre project of up to £4m.

b) to develop the detailed designs and Full Business Case (FBC) for the A4 Portway
Project up to £1.599m.

c) to deliver the development and submission to WECA of Business Cases for the
A37/A4018 project up to £4m.

The Chair advised that this was a key decision as it involved a spend of more than £500k and impacted
more than 2 wards.

The Head of City Transport outlined the report to Members and confirmed to the Committee that officers
would engage with them throughout the process.

The Chair moved the recommendations as set out in the report

The Vice-Chair seconded this motion.

Summary of main points raised/noted in discussion of this item:

1. In response to comments and questions about how the programme would affect travel and the bus
network, officers confirmed that many of the impacts and improvements from the funding would be in
the city centre area. The infrastructure scheme proposals for the city centre would be transformative.

2. Officers confirmed the consultation on city centre proposals would start in August.

Page 12
democractic.services@bristol.gov.uk

3. Officers confirmed that individual scheme detail would be brought back to the Committee in due
course to ensure a full opportunity for member discussion and input.

4. An issue was raised about feedback indicating that some groups had not felt previous consultations
were as effective as they could have been. It was suggested that the option of co-designing schemes
might be considered. Officers indicated that every effort was made to engage as effectively as possible
but were open to new ideas about how better to engage with communities and groups going forwards.

5. The Chair indicated his commitment to consider engaging though city-wide stakeholder groups and
working better with ward members going forwards.

6. It was noted that Council and WECA officers were looking at potential orbital bus routes but it was
noted that these options could be commercially challenging.

7. A member requested that their particular concerns about the lack of safe road crossings, especially
near bus stops, in the Stockwood area and the proposal to ban a particular right-hand turn which diverted
traffic off an A road onto small residential streets were minuted.

8. The Chair drew attention to the short-term timescales for using CRSTS funding.

Councillor Coombes moved an amendment to the report as follows:
Amend section a) of recommendation 2 to read as follows:
‘To proceed with the procurement and development of three distinct outline business cases for
A37/A4018 project work packages 3, 4 and 5.’

This amendment was seconded by Cllr Morris.

On being put to the vote, the amendment was LOST (2 members voting in favour and 7 against).

In further discussion, it was confirmed that the Committee would receive regular updates and dialogue on
the details of projects as they progressed. The Chair confirmed his personal commitment to this
approach.

The Committee then RESOLVED (8 members voting in favour and 1 against):

1. To note the previous approvals given in relation to the City Centre Project in May 2023; to the A4
Portway project in March 2024 and the A37/A4018 project in May 2023; as set out in this report.

2. To authorise the Executive Director: Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of the
Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee, to take all steps required to proceed with the
development of the projects, noting that all further iterations of the business cases will come back to
Committee for approval. Specifically, for the A37/A4018 project:

Page 13
democractic.services@bristol.gov.uk

a) To proceed with the procurement and development of three distinct full business cases for
A37/A4018 project work packages 3, 4 and 5.
b) To engage with key strategic stakeholders for work package 3.
c) To commence public engagement including stakeholder engagement on work packages 4 and 5.
d) To approve publicity materials relating to the projects.

3. To authorise the Executive Director: Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of the
Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee to take all steps required to accept and spend additional
funding (including procuring and awarding contracts):
a) to deliver Business Cases for approval by the Committee to submit to WECA for the City Centre
project of up to £4.00m.
b) to deliver the Full Business Case for approval by the Committee to submit to WECA for the A4
Portway Project up to £1.599m.
c) to deliver Business Cases for approval by the Committee to submit to WECA for the A37/A4018
project up to £4.00m.

9 2023-24 P12 Finance Outturn Report

The Committee considered a report that presented the transport financial forecast at period 2 / quarter 1
against the budget as at the end of May 2024.

The following points were highlighted by the Director: Economy of Place:
- There was a forecast £3.8m revenue pressure.
- A substantial amount of this was due to inflationary pressures.
- Officers were managing overspends.

Summary of main points raised/noted in discussion of this item:

1. The Chair confirmed that the report was for information purposes. He also suggested that a detailed
financial briefing for the whole committee should be arranged.

2. It was confirmed that the Council could not make a profit from residents parking scheme tariffs.
Section 55 legislation enabled the Council to offset surplus tariff income for investment in transport
schemes.

3. It was suggested that the highlighted ‘red’ text in the financial reports should be accompanied by an
explanation in future.

4. There was a discussion about the figures on page 55 of the report in relation to savings that had not yet
been achieved. It was noted that there were certain accounting issues such as recharging some costs of
the Council’s workforce and also delays to implementing some charges in car parks. Some targets had

Page 14
democractic.services@bristol.gov.uk

been hit by inflation but these had been mitigated within the Growth and Regeneration directorate
budget.

5. A Member suggested that although the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) was not part of this
budget, it would be useful for members to see reference to it in this report. Officers indicated they would
consider taking forward this request in terms of future reporting.

6. It was noted that officers would work with committee members on reviewing existing delegations.

The Committee RESOLVED:

- To note the contents of report on the Period 2 forecast for Transport and Connectivity.

Meeting ended at 7.35 pm

CHAIR __________________

Page 15
Agenda Item 7

Committee Report

PURPOSE: Final Decision Report

Key or non-key decision: Key decision affects 2 or more wards

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 12 September 2024

TITLE: Opportunities to promote sustainable transport through a review of parking
policies and charges

Ward(s) Citywide

Officer presenting the report: Shaun Taylor Job title: Head of Highways

Committee Chair: Councillor Ed Plowden
Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for G&R

Purpose of Report:

1. Within the context of Bristol’s Transport Policy, the Council needs to consider a range of
initiatives to further improve air quality and make more efficient use of on and off street,
public car parking spaces, whilst considering how the management of these spaces can help
driver behaviour change towards sustainable modes of travel. There is a need to maximise
the use of kerb space, given increasing demands for car clubs, cycle hangars, scooter parking
and EV (Electric Vehicle) charging, all set alongside a range of other uses such as pocket
parklets, trees and commercial use through licensing.
2. The evidence base outlines proposals to make changes to parking charges to keep up with
inflation, to rationalise any anomalies and to ensure that the cost of the first Residents’
Parking Permit covers the full cost of current operations.
3. The report also notes the need for an integrated approach and recommends setting up a Task
and Finish Group to develop and deliver a holistic Parking and Kerbside Strategy.
4. This paper seeks the Committee’s approval to implement these recommended proposals and
provides other options considered.

Additional information and statistics are included as Appendix A.

1
Version January 2024 Page 16
OFFICIAL
Evidence Base:

1 Need for a Parking and Kerbside strategy

In July 2019, the overarching Bristol Transport Strategy noted that a Bristol Parking Strategy was
needed and “in progress”. Cabinet Reports on parking:

 24 January 2023 - Introduction of Pay and Display Parking in District Car Parks agenda item no
20 ModernGov - bristol.gov.uk

 6 June 2023 - Residents Parking Scheme Policy Review agenda item no 10 - ModernGov -
bristol.gov.uk

 23 January 2024 - Residents Parking Scheme Policy Review agenda item no 14 - ModernGov -
bristol.gov.uk

The Bristol Parking Strategy has not progressed despite the above reports.

This report proposes to resolve current anomalies and make increases in line with inflation and to set
up a Task and Finish Group to develop a comprehensive strategy, given the increasing demands for
different forms of on-street storage for car clubs, cycle hangars, EV charging and E scooters,
alongside demands for further Resident Parking Zones due to population growth and displacement
from existing Zones.

In addition to storing of vehicles, there are growing demands for loading goods and boarding of
passengers to buses and taxis, as well as for other uses such as pocket parklets, trees and for
commercial uses through licensing.

Recommendation 1: Initiate a Task and Finish Group, to be chaired by Cllr Rob Bryher, to make
recommendations to the committee for a modern and holistic Parking and Kerbside Strategy.

2 Residents’ Parking Scheme - First Permit Increase and realignment of Easton & St Philips RPS
(Resident Parking Scheme) alongside First Permit increase.

In June 2023, the Mayor’s Cabinet proposed “changes to tariffs for low emissions vehicles, second
and third permits and CPZ permits” which were subsequently implemented on 08/01/2024 The
Cabinet Report also noted the need for “investigation of further policy changes as set out in the
report to come back to cabinet in October 2023”.

In January 24 (Agenda Item 14, Page 172 of (Public Pack)Agenda Document for Cabinet, 23/01/2024
16:00 (bristol.gov.uk)) the Cabinet noted that the investigation of further policy changes “has taken
longer than expected due to further considerations of potential changes. Some elements are no
longer under consideration such as change of operating hours and changes to restrictions during the
day.” Some of these further policy changes are now recommendations in this report.

Cabinet approved increasing the cost of a first permit from £56 to £178, although the decision was
made by the last administration not to proceed immediately. Although the delegated authority exists
now to implement this change, the Chair of the Committee considers that it would not be
appropriate or transparent to implement this without testing the view of current members, through

2
Version January 2024 Page 17
OFFICIAL
the new committee-based system.

Collectively, the revenue from the first permit sales does not currently cover the operational costs of
the RPS or the ongoing infrastructure replacement costs. We rely on income from other permit types
to cover these costs. Formalising an annual inflationary increase to all permits will ensure that costs
are covered and maintain the relative pricing.

As such it is considered appropriate to review the charges in line with inflation and in line with the
costs to the Council of operating RPS’s.

There are several considerations the Task and Finish Group will need to analyse, including how to use
RPZ fees to enable the implementation of Council policy and review the current boundaries. The
group will need to be mindful as to how this will potentially impact on the wider City, especially areas
located on the boundaries of new or existing Zones that may be affected by displacement, and the
impact on travel within Zones by permit holders.

In addition to the first permit increase, the Mayor’s Cabinet also confirmed that Easton & St Phillips
RPS would be brought in line with the other RPS. Historically ES RPS was out of alignment with other
zones. Phase One of a realignment process was completed in February 2024 – this brought the
structure of the permits in line with other RPS schemes, but prices were not increased to the full
level. A second phase to align the prices now needs to be completed. This change can be
implemented in approximately 3 months (subject to resource availability in the TRO Team) through a
Notice of Variation.

The prices are detailed in Appendix A. The transport budget implications of the Easton change are
minimal, but operationally we would like to see the schemes aligned.

Recommendation 2a: Approve and implement an increase of £56 to £124 for first vehicle permit
tariffs. This is the amount officers estimate will cover existing budgeted operating costs and allowing
for replacement Pay and Display machines over a 5-year rolling programme. The transport budget
benefit of this option is expected to be c£620k per annum.

Recommendation 2b: Approve all RPS permit types going forward are included within the Council’s
Fees and Charges so that an inflationary increase is made every year (rounded to the nearest whole
numbers that maintain proportionality between different permit types), agreed by full Council as
part of the budget setting process. In times of exceptionally low inflation, officers will be authorised
to determine whether to implement an annual increase, based on an assessment of whether the cost
of implementation would outweigh the financial benefit of the increase.

Recommendation 2c: Approve and implement price alignment for all Easton (ES) RPS permits with
the prevailing rates for other RPS as soon as possible to remove the pricing anomaly. The impact on
some households/businesses will be greater, but the risk of not doing so is that the scheme will
continue to run out of alignment.

These changes can be implemented through a Notice of Variation in approximately 3 months (subject
to resource availability in the Traffic Regulation Order (TRO) Team). The cost to implement these
proposals is minor (TRO process and software changes only), and any additional income will, in the
first instance, be offset existing transport budget pressures by covering operational and budgeted
costs.

3
Version January 2024 Page 18
OFFICIAL
Other options considered:

a) Approve and implement an increase of £40 a year (over and above any inflationary increase)
for next 3 years. Similar financial implications as the proposal recommended by Officers but
over a longer period and with slightly higher costs associated with annual increases.
b) Approve and implement the cost of a first permit from £56 to £178, as previously approved.
The cost to implement these proposals is minor (TRO process and software changes only) and
any additional income will, in the first instance, offset existing transport budget pressures.
The annual net gain to the transport budget, (allowing for a 20% reduction in permit numbers
due to modal shift and displacement), is expected to be in the region of £750k.
c) For Easton: Alignment of remaining permit types as planned in a future Phase Two (timing of
this to be specified).
d) If the increase of first permits prices is not supported, set a timescale for Phase Two to fully
align ES RPS with current rates in other schemes.

3 RPS Business, Customer, Medical & Trader Permits and Visitor Permits

There are several permits used in the RPS scheme.

Business & Customer Permits - These permits are issued to businesses that have premises within a
Residents Parking Scheme.

Business Permits - are for operational vehicles used by the business.

Customer Permits - are for the use of customers visiting the business premises.

Medical Permits - are for healthcare providers visiting premises within a Residents Parking Scheme.

Traders Permits - are for businesses that carry out specified trades, visiting premises within a
Residents Parking Scheme.

Traders Daily Scratch Cards - are also available and are essentially a trader’s Visitors Permit.

Visitors Permits - are for visitors to a residential premises within a Residents Parking Scheme.

Essential Visitors Permits - These are for use by carers (including family, friends, or medical
professionals) visiting a qualifying resident.

A more detailed description of the permits can be found in Proposal 3 in appendix A.

General permits increases were last implemented in June 2022; therefore, an inflation increase is
required to the various permit types above. 22% represents the % increase in RPI since the last time
these permits were increased in June 2022.

A certain number of free visitor permits are issued on demand to every qualifying household and
each permit is valid for a full calendar day. The number varies by scheme depending on how many
days per week the scheme is operational. A household in a 5-day scheme receives 50 visitor permits,

4
Version January 2024 Page 19
OFFICIAL
those in the 6-day scheme receive 60 and those in Permitted Parking Areas which operate 7 days
receive 70. We issue approximately 775,000 free visitor permits in the form of digital wallets and of
those approximately 400,000 are used each year. Households activate each individual permit online
or via a smartphone App with the date of use and visiting vehicle details. Any unused permits expire
after 12 months.

Households may currently buy a second allowance of visitor permits (available in wallets of 10) at a
current cost of £1.30 each. The rate was originally aligned with the hourly Pay and Display rate but
has become misaligned over time. We issue approximately 50,000 paid visitor permits per year.

We are proposing to introduce charging for visitor permits issued for free and limiting the number to
50/60/70 depending on the scheme. A charge for Visitor Permits will still offer a marked reduction
against the Pay and Display rates as visitors would be able to stay for any duration for the price of
one hour’s Pay and Display parking. Introduction of a charge will also help promote the use of
alternative methods of transport and active travel; and reflects the value of and competing demands
for, kerb space. We would make all Visitor Permits available in wallets of 10 up to a maximum of
50/60/70 permits per year (in line with current allowances for Free Visitor Permits per scheme area).
Any additional visitor parking would be via Pay and Display. Visitors would be subject to maximum
stay limits for Pay and Display parking (generally 3 hours but does vary by scheme).

Recommendation 3a: Apply a rounded 22% inflationary increase to these remaining permit types
(detail of which is included in Appendix A).

This change can be implemented in approximately 3 months through a Notice of Variation. The
transport budget impact of a 22% increase would be in the region of £100k (allowing for a degree of
modal shift) which will cover any implementation costs, and permit prices would increase by up to
£68 each depending on type. 22% represents the % increase in RPI since the last time these permits
were increased in June 22.

Recommendation 3b: Introduce a charge for Visitor Permits such that they cost the same as the
prevailing hourly Pay and Display Rate (currently £1.50 but is potentially subject to change as per the
recommendation 4) and remove the additional allowance per household.

This change can be implemented in approximately 12 months (subject to resource availability in the
TRO Team), through a full TRO change which will include statutory consultation). The transport
budget impact of this would be a net gain in the region of £220k allowing for a substantial degree of
modal shift and additional contract costs.

Note that this does not affect the issue of free Essential Visitor Permits which are issued to residents
with care needs.

Other options considered:

a) To introduce a charge for all Visitor Permits such that they cost the same as the prevailing
hourly Pay and Display Rate (currently £1.50 but is subject to change) and maintain the
additional paid visitor permit allowance per household.

b) Maintain the provision of free Visitor Permits but withdraw paid for Visitor Permits.
Additional visitors over and above the free permit limits would need to Pay and Display.

5
Version January 2024 Page 20
OFFICIAL
Visitors would be subject to maximum stay limits for Pay and Display parking (generally 3
hours but does vary by scheme). This change can be implemented in approximately 12
months (subject to resource availability in the TRO Team), through a full TRO change which
will include statutory consultation). The fiscal impact of this change has not been calculated
as would be dependent on the duration of each stay which is unknown.

c) Maintain the provision of free Visitor Permits but increase the cost of Paid Visitor Permits to
the prevailing hourly Pay and Display Rate (currently £1.50 but is subject to change). This
change can be implemented in approximately 3 months through a Notice of Variation. The
transport budget impact of this would be a net gain of approximately £10k.

4 RPS Pay and Display changes and removal of 30minutes Free parking in the RPS (New Proposals)

Pay and Display parking in the RPS is £1.50 p/hr. This was increased from £1 p/hr in June 2022
(although ES RPS has only been changed very recently) and has not kept pace with inflation.

Recommendation 4a: Increase the hourly Pay and Display rate in all RPS to £2 per hour.

This reflects the impact of inflation (22% RPI since January 2022 when the last change was approved)
and is rounded to the nearest 50p. Increasing the Pay and Display rate also reflects the demand for
kerb space. Rationing space by prices helps to manage demand, encourage greater turnover of
spaces (which is of benefit to those frontages that rely on a high turnover of parking), and promotes
modal shift towards active and sustainable travel. This change can be implemented in approximately
3 months through a Notice of Variation. The transport budget benefit of this would be in the region
of £500k p/annum.

Where parking demand is highest, in some RPS areas where there is significant demand and many
competing priorities for space in relation to tourist attractions, local high streets, student populations
etc. These areas with particularly high parking demand also see a conflict between residents and Pay
and Display users for space in shared use bays.

Modal shift may also be achieved by dividing some or all current zones into smaller zones, this will be
something the Task and Finish Group will be considering and may bring forward further
recommendations in the future.

Recommendation 4b: Approve the principle of an additional uplift to Pay and Display rates in
specified RPS areas to reflect demand and accordingly increase the Pay and Display rate in Clifton
Village RPS, Kingsdown RPS & Clifton East RPS to £2.50 per hour.

This will reflect the higher levels of demand for and value of kerb space in these areas. Higher prices
will further encourage modal shift and increase the turnover of spaces to the benefit of residents and
businesses. There are, however, risks that traffic and parking could be displaced to surrounding areas
if customers attempt to find cheaper parking outside the immediate RPS areas.

This change can be implemented in approximately 3 months through a Notice of Variation. The
additional transport budget benefit of this, allowing for some modal shift, would be in the region of
£250k p/annum.

6
Version January 2024 Page 21
OFFICIAL
Abuse of 30 minutes free parking, where customers can currently park for free for 30 minutes in any
Pay and Display bay in any RPS. The concession was originally introduced to allow customers to visit
shops very briefly however it is heavily abused, with customers taking multiple free tickets, or simply
taking a free ticket from the machine while a Civil Enforcement Officer is taking a record of their
vehicle. The tickets are being abused by the public (who write messages on the tickets), so the
Council bears the cost of materials and officer time to manage the process.

Recommendation 4c is to remove this concession so that all Pay & Display parking is chargeable.

This would remove regular public abuse of the concession, reduce operating costs, and improve our
ability to enforce the restrictions.

This change can be implemented in approximately 12 months (subject to resource availability in the
TRO Team), through a full TRO change which will include statutory consultation. Potential full year
transport budget benefit in the region of £250k.

Other options considered:

a) Do not make any changes.
b) Implement only one or two of Options 4 a, b, or c.
c) Introduce a reduced charge for the first 30 minutes parking. This was discounted because the
30m free ticket is only available as a standalone ticket. Customers who pay for 1 hour do not
receive 30m free on top of their paid for hour. The cost of administering a minimal 30m
charge (via RingGo or cash) would be less cost effective and as any charge would be small, it
would be unlikely to disincentivise abuse. See also Proposal 9 where officers recommend a
move away from short charging periods and standardise parking charges at fixed hourly rates

Car Park Proposals
5 District Car Park Charging (Previously Approved Proposal)

Cabinet approved a report in January 23 (Agenda Item 20, Page 115 of (Public Pack)Agenda
Document for Cabinet, 24/01/2023 16:00 (bristol.gov.uk) to introduce parking charges in several
currently free district car parks.

The cost of maintaining the district car parks is £276k. A detail breakdown is available in Appendix A.

The carparks that will receive the charge are proposed to be:

 Beechwood Rd – Frome Vale
 Callington Rd – Brislington West
 Chalks Rd – St George West
 Derby St – St George West
 Ducie Rd – Lawrence Hill
 Machin Rd – Henbury & Brentry
 Repton Rd – Brislington West
 Stoke View Rd - Eastville

7
Version January 2024 Page 22
OFFICIAL
 Waverley Rd – Avonmouth & Lawrence Weston
 Westbury Hill – Westbury-on-Trym & Henleaze

Due to pressures in the TRO team and some informal consultation with local health centres on the
provision of medical permits the proposal was not implemented immediately.

As part of the consultation the proposal that Health Care Centres can purchase reserved medical
bays for £280. This will pay for one bay to be signed as being for medical permit holders only. They
will then need a £5 permit for every vehicle they want to be able to use the bay. The idea is to
provide provision for Health Visitors who come and go all day, hence multiple cars can use the space
during a day.

It is up to each Health Centre how many permits/bays they want up to our maximum, but logically
the more permits they want to issue the more bays they will need.

Officers now need guidance on whether to proceed with the proposal (including limited provision for
healthcare professionals), which will require full statutory consultation as part of the Traffic
Regulation Order process.

The transport budget implication of the proposal is estimated to be £300k per annum and, as the
proposal was approved some time ago, budgets have already been adjusted in expectation of the
charges being implemented. While £150k has been mitigated for this budget year only, this now
represents a budget pressure for the service.

Recommendation 5: Proceed with the proposal and (subject to statutory consultation), implement
charging as soon as possible (realistically this is late 2024/early 2025).

The introduction of a modest £1 per hour Pay and Display charge in these locations will cover the
operating and maintenance costs of £276k and will enable better car park management by making
enforcement processes more efficient, discouraging all day parking, maximising the use of parking
space and ensuring effective turnover of spaces to support the local economy.

Other options considered:

a) Proceed with the proposal and (subject to statutory consultation), implement charging
later (committee to specify).
b) Do not proceed with proposal. Committee will need to mitigate the £300k per annum
revenue budget that has already been approved and assigned to this proposal.

6 Temple Gate & West End MSCPs and 7 Linear Pricing – Context

Evidence shows that increasing parking charges leads to a reduction in occupancy.

The table below shows the decline in parking hours purchased compared to revenue and budget
from April 2019 to Oct 2023. Overall transaction levels had recovered to, (and stabilised at), around
80% of pre-pandemic levels by 2022. Major tariff changes were implemented in May/June 2022
(RPS), and Jan 2023 (remaining on and off street). Since then, income has risen but transaction levels
have fallen.

8
Version January 2024 Page 23
OFFICIAL
Where there is little alternate parking available, such as in the RPS, this is great news from a policy
perspective, as it indicates a modal shift to more sustainable transport is taking place. However,
where alternate parking provision is freely available, in the form of privately operated car parks, the
situation is less clear cut and officers are concerned that customers may simply have transferred to
other, cheaper, car parks.

While this does not stop our overall ambition, to ration parking by price only to encourage modal
shift to sustainable transport, it does mean we have to be more mindful of the synergies between
public and private operators and the unintended outcomes of rapid pricing increases to encourage
modal shift.

Proposals 6 & 7 consider two opportunities further.

6 Temple Gate & West End MSCPs

Most private operators offer an early bird parking rate to attract long stay users with prices starting
at circa £8 per day for customers who arrive before 9am. Council car parks have no comparable tariff
as the traditional perception is that these would encourage commuter parking. Our policy has been
to set high parking charges to encourage customers to make more sustainable travel choices.

However, as these cheaper tariffs are freely available from other operators (who collectively offer far
more public parking spaces), it is more probable than not, that customers continue to drive and
simply take advantage of the cheaper rates offered by private operators. Due to the location of the
car parks, customers are most likely driving past BCC Multi-Storey Car Parks to access cheaper
parking nearer the city centre.

Both Temple Gate and West End are on the edges of the City Centre and an early bird offer at these
underutilised locations could encourage customers to park on the outskirts of the city and complete
their journeys on foot. As part of the proposal the team will investigate and work with other
transport colleagues to consider if there is any benefit in delivering transport style hub at the
carparks i.e. provision for scooter parking or cycle hangers. This will enable people to potentially park
and wheel options. West End has the additional advantage for customers of being outside the Clean
Air Zone. As an early bird charge would still be significantly more expensive than a bus journey,
officers do not anticipate a significant reverse modal shift.

An assessment of private operator charges is included in Appendix A. Officers have assessed the
budgetary impact of different pricing points and differing levels of take up.

Recommendation 6 is to introduce an £8 early bird tariff from Monday to Friday at West End and
Temple Gate MSCPs. The tariff will be available to customers who arrive between before 9am and
whose stay, when calculated against the prevailing standard tariff, would cost more than £8.00 and
be competitive with private operators. The full year transport budget benefit will need to be
assessed in the months following the change being made.

This change can be implemented in approximately 12 months (subject to resource availability in the
TRO Team), through a full TRO change which will include statutory consultation. The full year
transport budget benefit will need to be assessed in the months following the change being made.
Current assumptions are that take up at the lower end of estimates would be in the region of £96k
per annum, although this revenue would need to offset potential lost income, as existing customers

9
Version January 2024 Page 24
OFFICIAL
benefit from these new rates. Customers may also relocate from other BCC locations such as Portwall
Lane to Temple Gate, but this would create additional capacity for shorter stay parking closer to the
centre.

Other options considered:

a) Implementing an early bird tariff at £10. This is not recommended as would not be
competitive with private operators and would therefore be ineffective.

b) Implementing an early bird tariff at all long stay car parks. This is not recommended as
other car parks are more centrally located, and we do not want to actively encourage
traffic to drive further into the city centre than necessary.

7 Linear Pricing

Parking charges are currently set to encourage turnover of spaces and modal shift to sustainable
transport.

There is some variation in existing parking charges, but these can be summarised as:
a) Off street car parks charge £2.50 an hour for short term parking up to 4 hours and, where
available, a flat rate of £18 for all stays over 4 hours, (irrespective of time of day).
b) On Street parking (and adjacent off street car parks), charge £3.00 an hour for stays of 2 or 4
hours, (payable in 50p increments).
c) In both cases an evening charge of £4.00 covers any period between 6pm and midnight and
an overnight charge of £5.50 covers any period between 6pm and 9am the following day.

Parking charges were last changed in January 2023, having been approved in October 2022. Inflation
since that time is 8.7% (based on RPI). Increasing charges in line with inflation would mean:
d) Off street car parking hourly rate would increase to £2.70 per hour, with over 4-hour rate
increasing to £19.60.
e) On Street parking (including adjacent off street car parks), would increase to £3.50 per hour
(payable in 50p increments), rounded up for simplicity of tariff.
f) Evening charge would increase to £4.50 and overnight charge would increase to £6.00.

However, officers receive complaints regarding the transparency of the existing tariff structure and
the difference between the daytime and evening rates, as customers whose stay straddles the 6pm
changeover time pay disproportionately more to park.

Officers would like to simplify and improve the customer experience by reviewing the overall
structure of our parking tariffs. Officers would like to move to a linear tariff structure where the same
hourly rate applies from 8am to 10pm, 7 days a week at all on and off-street parking locations:

g) Where a maximum stay is in force between 8am and 6pm, it will be retained with no change.
h) The hourly rate will be charged for each hour, or part thereof. At current rates this will be
£2.50 for off street locations and £3.00 for on street locations. (The exceptions to this are
Queen Square and Brunswick Square Car Parks which, to the public, are indistinguishable
from their corresponding on street locations and are therefore charged at £3.00 per hour to
avoid confusion).

10
Version January 2024 Page 25
OFFICIAL
i) Customers using long stay car parks will be able to park for any number of hours and pay
proportionately for the time used, rather than paying the full £18 for a stay over 4 hours.
j) Customers parking on street will pay for whole hours, removing the current complicated
system where parking is bought in multiples 50p, where each 50p buys just a few minutes.
k) Evening customers will pay the same hourly rates as daytime customers up to 10pm.
l) Actual hourly rates set for linear charging will be based on the prevailing hourly rate following
any inflationary increases.

A linear tariff structure would continue to encourage turnover and support the retail and leisure
economy, whilst also continuing to deter long stay parking as longer stays would be more expensive.
It is fair to say some customers will be better off under a linear system and some will be worse off. A
range of projections are included in Appendix A to show the potential impact of the changes and the
proportion of customers who may be positively or negatively affected.

The following table shows the potential impact on customers currently paying the £4 evening tariff.
Whilst most customers will pay more for evening parking under a linear system, this does reflect the
length of stay and brings parity with daytime customers.

Evening (6pm - midnight) - £4
Linear Price Change % Customers
£0.00 -£4.00 1%
£2.50 -£1.50 6%
£5.00 £1.00 16%
£7.50 £3.50 41%
£10.00 £6.00 37%
£12.50 £8.50 0%
£15.00 £11.00 0%

Our prices are more expensive than the Galleries or Cabot Circus and lower than NCP, Britannia &
Millennium Square. Due to location, it is the latter group which is a more pertinent comparison.

Recommendation 7 Implement both an inflationary increase and linear charging as a two-phase
project.

An inflationary increase can be implemented in approximately 3 months through a Notice of
Variation. Linear charging can be implemented in approximately 12 months (subject to resource
availability in the TRO Team), through a full TRO change which will include statutory consultation.
There would significant customer benefits to this proposal. Allowing for attrition due to modal shift,
the combined full year transport budget benefit of both inflationary increase and linear charging is
estimated to be in the region of £1.5m per annum.

Other options considered:

a) Implement both an inflationary increase and linear charging as a one-phase project. This
would take 12 months to implement and does not address the current impact of inflation.

11
Version January 2024 Page 26
OFFICIAL
b) Implement linear charging only to improve customer service and simplify tariff structure. This
will address customer feedback but will take a long time to implement and does not address
the impact of inflation.

c) Implement an inflation-based charge only. This will maintain existing tariff structures, so will
not address customer feedback, but can be done quickly.

d) Implement linear charging as described but with a cap on the total daily charge payable.

Summary of Recommendations: -

That, subject to necessary consultation through the TRO process, the Committee:

1. Initiates a Task and Finish Group, to be chaired by Cllr Rob Bryher, to make
recommendations to the committee for a modern and holistic Parking and Kerbside Strategy.
2. Residents Parking
a. Approve and implement an increase of £56 to £124 for first vehicle permit tariffs.
b. Approve all RPS permit types going forward are included within the Council’s Fees and
Charges so that an inflationary increase is made every year (rounded to the nearest
whole numbers).
c. Approve and implement price alignment for all Easton (ES) RPS permits with the
prevailing rates for other RPS as soon as possible to remove the pricing anomaly.
3. RPS Business, Customer, Medical & Trader Permits and Visitor Permits
a. Approves a rounded 22% inflationary increase to medical, trader, business & customer
permits.
b. Approves introducing a charge for all Visitor Permits (excluding Essential Visitor
Permits for care needs). That charge to be aligned with the prevailing hourly Pay and
Display Rate and remove the additional allowance per household.
4. RPS Pay and Display changes and removal of 30m free parking in the RPS (New Proposals)
a. Approves a rounded 22% inflationary increase to RPS Pay and Display rate to £2 per
hour.
b. Approves the principle of an additional uplift to Pay and Display rates in specified RPS
areas to reflect demand and encourage turnover of spaces, and its application in
Clifton Village RPS, Kingsdown RPS & Clifton East RPS.
c. Approves the removal of the 30-minute free parking tariff in all RPS.
5. Approves implementation of charging at the District Car Parks as soon as possible.
6. Approves the implementation of competitive early bird charging at Temple Gate and West
End MSCPs and monitoring of the impacts.
7. Approves an inflationary increase to on and off-street parking charges and a move to linear
charging though a two-phase project.
8. Delegates authority to the Executive Director, Growth and Regeneration to implement the
approved proposals.

Corporate Strategy alignment:

1. Transport and Connectivity – Safe and Active Travel, Connectivity. Proposals will help to

12
Version January 2024 Page 27
OFFICIAL
prioritise more road space for sustainable modes through infrastructure like cycle hangars as
well as better reflecting the cost of parking.
2. Environment and Sustainability – Climate Resilience, Ecological Recovery, Carbon Neutral.
Through encouraging sustainable transport use.

City Benefits:

1. Increased turnover of parking spaces
2. Improved transparency of parking tariffs
3. Increased desirability of sustainable transport modes.
4. Enhance ability to adapt to climate change through reallocation of road space.

Consultation Details:

Statutory consultation will take place as part of the TRO process. The extent of the consultation is
determined by the type of TRO change being implemented. Full changes involve more consultation
and more scope for objections than changes which can be conducted by a Notice of Variation

Background Documents:

1. Bristol Transport Strategy
2. Joint Local Transport Plan - Combined Authority (westofengland-ca.gov.uk)

Revenue Cost -£3.536m Source of Revenue Parking Services
Funding
Capital Cost N/A Source of Capital Funding Implementation costs for each proposal
will be offset by additional revenue from
the proposal.
One off cost ☐ Ongoing cost Saving Proposal ☐ Income generation proposal ☒
☐
Note: Figures shown here represent the totality of the various proposals (except proposal 7 which is already
budgeted). Any additional revenue will be used to offset existing budget pressures within the Directorate
and do not represent savings proposals.

Professional comments section:
1. Finance Advice:
This report seeks approval for an increase in tariffs to improve air quality and encourage a shift in the city to
more sustainable modes of transport.

Income from parking tariffs has been declining in real terms (ie not increasing in line with inflation)
following the pandemic as a result of changes in behaviour and competition from other providers. The
Council currently expects to fall short of income targets by £1.9m as shown in the table below.

13
Version January 2024 Page 28
OFFICIAL
All figures £ks 2024/25 Revised Budget Period 4 Forecast Variance
Multi-Storey Car Parks (4,452) (3,518) 934
Off Street (2,035) (1,966) 69
On Street (4,956) (4,366) 590
Resident Parking Schemes (5,439) (5,173) 266
TOTAL (16,882) (15,023) 1,859

However, the figures above do not include the increase in income budgets implemented in 2024/25 as a
result of inflation. All eligible income budgets were increased by 6.7%, representing the latest inflationary
estimate, for 2024/25 which equates to an additional £2.16m for the Management of Place division. This
increase largely falls within parking so, when combined with the £1.86m variance described in the table
above, means that parking as a whole is falling short of income targets by c. £4m.

The proposals described in this paper are expected to generate £3.5m in additional income, if all proposals
were accepted, broken down in the table below.

All figures £ks Proposal Annual Increase in Income
Residents Increase first vehicle permit tariffs from £56 to £124. 620
Parking Scheme Increase all permits in real terms each year. Unknown
Align permit costs in Easton with other zones. Negligible
Increase Business, Customer and Trader/Medical
permits in line with inflation (back dated to the last
increase in January 2022) 100
Increase the costs of visitor permits to align with Pay
and Display prices. 220
Increase Pay and Display prices to £2 per hour in
line with inflation (backdated to last increase in
January 2022). 500
Increase the Pay and Display rate in Clifton Village,
Kingsdown and Clifton East zones to £2.50 per hour. 250
Removal of 30 minute free parking in Resident
Parking Scheme zones. 250
Introduce charges in currently free District Car
Parks. 0
RESIDENTS PARKING SCHEME TOTAL 1,940
Multi-Storey Car Introduce an £8 early bird tariff from Monday to
Parks Friday at West End and Temple Gate. 96
Raise prices in line with inflation and introduce a
linear pricing model that charges the same hourly
rate throughout opening hours. 1,500
MULTI-STORY CAR PARKS TOTAL 1,596
PARKING TOTAL 3,536

These is considerable uncertainty in these estimates as a result of difficulty in assessing how changes in
prices will affect behaviour and, in some cases, unknown current volumes. This has been captured in the
table below. For example, the Council does not know how many people currently use the 30 minute free
parking provision. For those proposals where the current volumes are unknown and there is likely to be a
material change in behaviour the estimate confidence is Low. For those proposals where the current

14
Version January 2024 Page 29
OFFICIAL
volumes are known but the change in behaviour is not, the estimate confidence is Medium. Finally, for
those proposals where the change is unlikely to drive a material change in behaviour the estimate
confidence is High.

The table also includes delivery timescales which are either a three month Notice of Variation or twelve
months for Full Traffic Regulation Order (assuming these are prioritised for immediate start by Strategic
City Transport). Broadly, those proposals which require three months to deliver should be in place by start
of 2025/26 while those proposals requiring twelve months will likely be implemented partway through that
year.

Proposal Estimate Delivery
Confidence Timescales
(Months)
Increase first vehicle permit tariffs from £56 to £124. Medium 3
Increase all permits in real terms each year. Low 3
Align permit costs in Easton with other zones. High 3
Increase Business, Customer and Trader/Medical permits in line with High 3
inflation (back dated to the last increase in January 2022)
Increase the costs of visitor permits to align with Pay and Display Medium 3
prices.
Increase Pay and Display prices to £2 per hour in line with inflation Medium 12
(backdated to last increase in January 2022).
Increase the Pay and Display rate in Clifton Village, Kingsdown and Medium 3
Clifton East zones to £2.50 per hour.
Removal of free 30 minute parking in Resident Parking Scheme Low 12
zones.
Introduce charges in currently free District Car Parks. Low 12
Introduce an £8 early bird tariff from Monday to Friday at West End Low 12
and Temple Gate.
Raise prices in line with inflation and introduce a linear pricing model Medium 3
that charges the same hourly rate throughout opening hours.

Finance Business Partner: Ben Hegarty, Finance Business Partner Growth and Regeneration, 2 September
2024.

2. Legal Advice:

Under the powers of the Road Traffic Regulation Act (RTRA) (as amended) Local Authorities may impose
charges for parking in car parks or on-street. Statutory guidance confirms that raising revenue should not
be an objective of parking enforcement and the income and any surplus derived from these charges must
be used in accordance with s55 (as amended) of the RTRA. Guidance also confirms that it is appropriate in
the interests of good governance for enforcement authorities to forecast revenue in advance. Income from
Residents Parking Schemes shall be used to fund the costs of running and administering those schemes.
Any surplus from this or other parking revenue can only be used as part of the transport budget.

Notice of Variations of charges must be published in a local newspaper at least 21 days before the revised
charges come into force and copies of the Notice must be displayed in any relevant parking place until such
time as the revised tariff comes into force.

15
Version January 2024 Page 30
OFFICIAL
Where any of the proposed changes needs to be the subject of a consultation exercise, the consultation
must be carried out at a formative stage in the process, must give sufficient detail of the reasons for each
proposal (to enable intelligent consideration of what is being proposed) and must allow sufficient time for
any consultees to consider the proposals and respond to them.

Any consultation responses received must be conscientiously taken into account in finalising the decision.
There must also be clear evidence that the decision maker has actively considered the consultation
responses received, or at least a summary of them, before the decision or the proposed changes are made.
Legal Team Manager: Joanne Mansfield 23 August 2024

3. Implications on IT: I can see no implications on IT regarding this activity.
IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead Enterprise Architect 16 August 2024

4. HR Advice: There are no HR implications evident
HR Partner: Celia Williams, HR Business Partner – Growth and Regeneration, 16 August 2024

16
Version January 2024 Page 31
OFFICIAL
APPENDICES
Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal YES

Appendix A includes further information and statistics to support the proposals.

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment YES

Appendix D – Risk assessment NO

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO

17
Version January 2024 Page 32
OFFICIAL
Opportunities to promote sustainable transport through a review of parking policies and
charges. Appendix A – Information and Statistics

Residents Parking Scheme Summary Data:

Type Number Income % Comments
First Permits 11,400 £724,105 32% Proposal 2
Recently increased. No new
Second Permits 2,160 £436,703 19% proposal
Recently increased. No new
Third Permits 185 £95,060 4% proposal
Business
Proposal 3
Permits 555 £413,425 18%
Customer
Proposal 3
Permits 1,280 £236,768 11%
Trader Permits 1,057 £88,928 4% Proposal 3
Medical Permits 400 £724,105 32% Proposal 3
Free Visitor 395,600 £69,394 3% Proposal 3
Paid Visitor 53,380 £190,363 8% Proposal 3
Total £2,254,745 100%
Table 1: Approximate breakdown of permit numbers and revenue from 2023-24

Proposal 2

Approved Budget
Operational Costs £919,167
P&D -£3,460,680
Permits -£2,897,460
Grand Total -£5,438,973
Table 2: Current approved budget
The operational expenditure budget does not allow for replacement Pay & Display Machines
when they reach the end of their working life. Oldest schemes are approaching that point
now. Replacing c600 machines through a 5-year rolling programme would cost in the region
of £420,000 per annum in hardware alone assuming a purchase price of £3,500 per
machine.
Adding the originally proposed £68 to the first permit price would bridge the gap to existing
income and expenditure budgets and would also fund replacement Pay & Display machines.

Page 33
Proposal 2:

Permit Type ES RPS (Resident Parking Scheme) Other Schemes Current Cost*
Current Cost
First Permit Band A – Free
Band B - £22.50
Band C to K - £45 Band A to K - £56
Band L to M - £45 Band L to M - £84
No Band or pre-2001 - £45 No Band or pre-2001 - £56
Second Permit £100 £224
Third Permit £220 £560
Business Permit £200 (£118 discounted) £280 (£164 discounted)
Customer Permit £208 (£125 discounted) £292 (£176 discounted)
Landlord £200 £280
Trader/Medical Permit £224 £224
Table 3: Comparison between Easton & St Phillips current costs and those for other schemes
*These are indicative prices only. Actual figures will reflect any changes resulting from the
approval of other proposals in this paper.

Proposal 3:
The number of business/customer/medical/trader permits are shown at the top of this
document.

Type Current Cost Cost with c22% inflation
Business Permit £280 (£164 discounted) £342 (£200 discounted)
Customer Permit £292 (£176 discounted) £356 (£214 discounted)
Trader/Medical Permit £224 £274
Table 4: Current and proposed costs of business/customer/medical/trader permit.
Tariff increased were last approved in January 2022. Based on RPI, inflation since that time is
21.8%. Figures rounded to nearest whole number (whilst retaining proportionality between
charges).
Discounted rates are available for businesses in receipt of full Small Business Rate Relief,
charities (as defined in section 1 of the Charities Act 2011), places of worship (as defined in
Section 10 of the Equalities Act 2011) and educational establishments (who meet the
definition of a school in Section 4 of the 1996 Education Act).
There are some anomalies with these definitions in the Traffic Regulation Orders and
although the tariff changes to these permits can be done through a Notice of Variation, we
will take the opportunity to standardise the approach to discounted rates to those shown
above (and published online) as part of any full TRO (Traffic Regulation Order) Change that is
undertaken in relation to the RPS.

Page 34
More detail explanation of the various permits:
Business & Customer Permits

These permits are issued to businesses that have premises within a Residents Parking
Scheme area and are only valid within that scheme area for use in permit holders and
shared use parking bays.

Business Permits are for operational vehicles used by the business and are vehicle specific
digital ‘virtual’ permits. Business Permits cost £280 per year in all scheme areas other than
Easton & St. Philips where they cost £200 per year. A discounted rate is available for
businesses in receipt of Small Business Rate Relief, charities, places of worship and
educational establishments. This £164 a year for all schemes areas except Easton & St Philips
which costs £118 a year.

Customer Permits are for the use of customers visiting the business premises. They are
issued as paper permits for use in any vehicle in which they are displayed. Customer Permits
cost £292 per year in all scheme areas other than Easton & St. Philips where they cost £208
per year. A discounted rate is available for businesses in receipt of Small Business Rate Relief,
charities, places of worship and educational establishments. This is £176 a year for all
schemes areas except Easton & St Philips which costs £125 a year.

Medical Permits

Medical Permits are issued to any person or service provider who is a registered healthcare
provider who undertakes healthcare within the home within one or more Residents Parking
Scheme area. They are currently vehicle specific paper permits and are valid within all
Residents Parking Scheme areas (but not within the Central Parking Zone) for use in any
permit holders or shared use parking bay. These permits cost £224 per year.

Traders Permits

Trader's permits are issued to businesses that carry out one or more specified trades that
require them to visit domestic premises within one or more Residents Parking Scheme areas
to carry out that trade. They are currently vehicle specific paper permits and are valid within
all Residents Parking Scheme areas (but not within the Central Parking Zone) for use in any
permit holders or shared use parking bay. These permits cost £224 per year.

Alternatively, or in addition traders may apply for up to three books of 25 Traders Daily
Scratch Cards per year. These scratch cards are essentially a trader’s Visitors Permit. The
user indicates on the scratch card the date of validity. The card is displayed in the vehicle
concerned and they are for use in any permit holders or shared use parking bay. Each book
of 25 scratch cards costs £73.

Page 35
Visitors Permits

Households within each Residents Parking Scheme area are entitled to a specified number of
free daily visitors permits per year. These visitors' permits are for the use of visitors to the
domestic address and are valid in any permit holders or shared use parking bay within the
scheme area in which the household is located. These permits are issued as digital ‘virtual’
permits and are vehicle specific. The householder registers the vehicle registration online.
The number of free daily visitors permits available within any twelve-month period varies
according to the scheme area and corresponds to the number of days per week that scheme
area is operational. For instance, a household in a scheme area that operates five days a
week would have a free allocation of 50 visitors permits per twelve-month period.

Each household is also entitled to purchase additional visitors permits up to the same
number as their free entitlement. These additional visitors permit cost £1.30 each.

Households or carers within each Residents Parking Scheme area may also apply for
Essential Visitors Permits. These are for use by carers including family, friends or medical
professionals visiting a qualifying resident. These are issued as ‘any vehicle’ paper permits,
valid for a year and for use in permit holders are shared use parking bays only within the
resident’s scheme area. These permits are currently free of charge.

Proposal 3:

Visitor Free Paid Total Current Value at £2 Value at
Parking Value each allowing £1.50 each
Permits for 50% allowing for
reduction in 50%
Free Permit reduction in
Volumes Free Permit
Volumes
Total (All 395,072 49,996 445,068 £64,995 £430,069 £306,303
Schemes)
Table 5: Free and Paid Visitor Permits during 2023-24 and the impact of introducing a charge
for all permits at two different price points.

Proposal 4:
30m Free
The data available to demonstrate the use of the 30m free ticket is difficult to analyse
because members of the public frequently take advantage of the free vend to write unique
messages on tickets using the machine keypad.
Officers have estimated the following volumes (based on limited samples due to the time
taken to cleanse the data):

Page 36
Estimated Annual
No. Valid Free
Free tickets
Tickets
(weekly total x 52)
Sample Week 1 6,860 356,720
Sample Week 2 7,613 395,876
Average 7,237 376,298
Table 6: Estimated volume of 30-minute free tickets.
Assuming half these users buy a Pay & Display ticket at the current rate of £1.50, the annual
budgetary impact is estimated to be in the region of £250k.

Pay and Display
Table shows 2023-24 Pay & Display Revenue. Income per space gives an indication of usage:

Approx
£2 p/hr £2 p/hr
P&D or Income Number
allowing for allowing for
RPS Income Shared per hours
50% modal 25% modal
Use Space bought
shift shift
Spaces
Clifton Village £954,895 875 £1,091 636,597 £159,149 £238,724
Kingsdown £442,825 515 £859 295,217 £73,804 £110,706
Bower Ashton £9,904 12 £852 6,603 £1,651 £2,476
Clifton East £505,555 805 £627 337,037 £84,259 £126,389
Spike Island £51,294 116 £442 34,196 £8,549 £12,824
Southville £218,514 536 £407 145,676 £36,419 £54,629
Redcliffe £44,258 119 £370 29,506 £7,376 £11,065
Bedminster
East £107,171 326 £328 71,448 £17,862 £26,793
Cliftonwood &
Hotwells £115,030 436 £263 76,687 £19,172 £28,758
Cotham North £140,376 536 £262 93,584 £23,396 £35,094
Redland £52,001 212 £245 34,668 £8,667 £13,000
Montpelier £50,296 249 £201 33,531 £8,383 £12,574
Cotham £130,648 720 £181 87,099 £21,775 £32,662
Easton £113,302 630 £179 75,535 £18,884 £28,326
St Pauls £57,660 321 £179 38,440 £9,610 £14,415
Total £2,993,735 £498,956 £748,434
Table 7: RPS Pay & Display parking data and impact of inflationary tariff change assuming
different amounts of modal shift.

Page 37
By increasing the cost in the busiest zones even further, we can encourage modal shift and
improve turnover of spaces. The table below shows the impact of an additional 50p increase
at the 3 busiest locations (Bower Ashton excluded due to relative size):

Additional Additional
Approx
50p p/hr 50p p/hr
P&D or Income Number
allowing allowing
RPS Income Shared per hours
for 50% for 25%
Use Space bought
modal modal
Spaces
shift shift
Clifton Village £954,895 875 £1,091 636,597 £159,149 £238,724
Kingsdown £442,825 515 £859 295,217 £73,804 £110,706
Clifton East £505,555 805 £627 337,037 £84,259 £126,389
Total £1,903,276 £317,213 £475,819
Table 8: RPS Pay & Display parking data and impact of additional charges in 3 busiest zones
assuming different amounts of modal shift.

Proposal 5
A breakdown of the annual costs of maintaining the district car parks if charges are
introduced is shown in the table below. This includes maintenance of (but not initial
purchase of) Pay & Display infrastructure and an estimated uplift in Business Rates:

Cost Type Cost
Permit Processing £1,711
P&D Machines £4,048
Site Inspections £2,033
Admin £47,547
Maintenance + Operations £220,968
Total £276,310
Table 9: Cost of operating and maintaining District Car Parks
For further information of this proposal please see the original Cabinet Report (Agenda Item
20, Page 115 of (Public Pack)Agenda Document for Cabinet, 24/01/2023 16:00
(bristol.gov.uk)

Page 38
Proposal 6
Research shows the following car parks offer early bird deals:

Car Park Arrive Depart Price Price NCP App
Cabot Circus 05:00 - 10:00 23:00 £8.00 N/A
NCP Broadmead 06:00 - 09:00 23:59 £8.95 £6.95
NCP Nelson St 06:00 - 09:00 23:59 £10.95 £9.95
NCP Rupert St 06:00 - 09:00 23:59 £11.95 £10.95
NCP St James Barton 06:00 - 09:00 23:59 £8.95 £6.95
Table 10: Other operators early bird deals.
The other main private operators with central car parks do not offer early bird deals:

Car Park Over 8-hour rate
Britania Harbourside £16.00
Millenium Square £18.00
Apex Prince St £26.95
Temple Meads £15.80
Gardiner Haskins £16.00
Table 11: Other operators all day tariffs when early bird deals not offered.
The over 8-hour rate at West End and Temple Gate is £18.00. An early bird offer at West End
may deter users from driving on to Britania Harbourside or Millennium Square or even to
the central NCPs.
An Early Bird offer at Temple Gate may deter users travelling onto Temple Meads.

Location Arrive Depart Tariff x50 per day x100 per day
West End 06:00 – 09:00 Up to £10 c£120k c£240k
23:59
Temple Gate 06:00 – 09:00 Up to £10 c£120k c£240k
23:59
West End 06:00 – 09:00 Up to £8 c£96k c£192k
23:59
Temple Gate 06:00 – 09:00 Up to £8 c£96k c£192k
23:59
Table 12: Potential impact of early bird deals at BCC car parks at different price points and
take up levels.
Calculations assume this rate is available Monday to Friday only.

Page 39
Proposal 7
Off Street Charges
The table below shows the current off street long stay parking charges and provides
indicative new rates. Tariff increases were last approved in October 2022. Based on RPI,
inflation since that time is 8.7%. Figures rounded to nearest practical value (where charges
are shared with On Street charges such as evening or overnight, this means to the nearest
50p).

Impact of inflation:

Car Park Up Up to Up to Up to Up to Up to
Up to 3 24 Over-
Comparison to 1 2
Hours
4 6 8 12
Hours*
Eve
night
Current Hour Hours Hours Hours Hours Hours
BCC CURRENT
£2.50 £5.00 £7.50 £10.00 £18.00 £18.00 £18.00 £18.00 £4.00 £5.50
OFF STREET
BCC PROPOSED
£2.70 £5.40 £8.10 £10.80 £19.60 £19.60 £19.60 £19.60 £4.50 £6.00
OFF STREET
Table 13a: Current and proposed Off Street tariffs with 8.7% inflation.
Impact of Linear charging at current rates:

Car Park Up to Up to Up to Up to Up to Up to Up to
24 Over-
Comparison 1 2 3 4 6 8 12
Hours*
Eve
night
Current Hour Hours Hours Hours Hours Hours Hours
BCC CURRENT
£2.50 £5.00 £7.50 £10.00 £18.00 £18.00 £18.00 £18.00 £4.00 £5.50
OFF STREET
BCC PROPOSED
£2.50 £5.00 £7.50 £10.00 £15.00 £20.00 £30.00 £35.00 N/A N/A
OFF STREET
Table 13b: Current and proposed Off Street tariffs with linear tariffs. Not all hourly rates are
shown – under a linear system parking will be sold in whole hours from 8am to 10pm,
Monday to Sunday, up to the maximum permitted in each location.
Impact of both Linear AND inflation:

Car Park Up to Up to Up to Up to Up to Up to Up to
24 Over-
Comparison 1 2 3 4 6 8 12
Hours*
Eve
night
Current Hour Hours Hours Hours Hours Hours Hours
BCC CURRENT
£2.50 £5.00 £7.50 £10.00 £18.00 £18.00 £18.00 £18.00 £4.00 £5.50
OFF STREET
BCC PROPOSED
£2.70 £5.40 £8.10 £10.80 £16.20 £21.60 £32.40 £37.80 N/A N/A
OFF STREET
Table 13c Current and proposed Off Street tariffs with 8.7% inflation and linear charges. Not
all hourly rates are shown – under a linear system parking will be sold in whole hours from
8am to 10pm, Monday to Sunday, up to the maximum permitted in each location.
* On Street Tariffs apply to Brunswick Square and Queen Square Car Parks.

Page 40
If Early Bird deals are introduced at Temple Gate and West End, anyone arriving before 9am,
Monday to Friday, will pay a maximum of £8. Very few customers at those locations would
pay the £32.40/£37.80 rate.
The following table compares current off street parking rates to other private operators
(green prices are cheaper than BCC, red prices are more expensive, but note that due to
location we are unlikely to be impacted by Clifton Down, Trinity, Galleries or Cabot Circus):

Up to Up to Up to
Car Park Comparison 1 2 Up to 3 Up to 4 Up to 6 Up to 8 12 24
Current Hour Hours Hours Hours Hours Hours Hours Hours
BCC Long Stay £2.50 £5.00 £7.50 £10.00 £18.00 £18.00 £18.00 £18.00
Clifton Down
Shopping Centre £1.50 £2.50 £3.50 £5.50 £12.00 £12.00 £12.00 £12.00
Trinity Centre £3.00 £4.00 £5.00 £6.00 £8.00 £9.00 £9.00 £9.00
The Galleries £2.40 £3.40 £4.40 £6.40 £8.40 £18.00 £18.00 £18.00
Cabot Circus £3.20 £4.00 £5.00 £7.00 £9.00 £20.00 £20.00 £20.00
Gardiner Haskins £3.00 £4.00 £5.00 £7.00 £11.00 £16.00 £16.00 £20.00
Bristol Temple Meads £2.60 £7.70 £7.70 £15.80 £15.80 £15.80 £15.80 £15.80
Britannia Car Park £3.00 £6.00 £9.00 £9.00 £12.00 £15.00 £16.00 £17.00
Millennium Square £3.50 £7.00 £11.00 £11.00 £13.50 £18.00 £21.00 £25.00
NCP Pay on the Day
Rates* £3.95 £7.90 £11.85 £15.80 £23.70 £24.95 £24.95 £24.95
NCP Pay by App
Rates* £2.95 £5.90 £8.85 £11.80 £17.70 £21.95 £21.95 £21.95
Prince Street £3.95 £7.90 £11.85 £15.80 £23.70 £26.95 £26.95 £26.95
Table 14: Comparison of current rates with other operators
* NCP car parks at Broadmead, Rupert Street, Nelson Street and St James Barton

Car Park Up to Up to Up to Up to Up to Up to Up to
Comparison Linear 1 2 3 4 6 8 12 24
+8.7% Hour Hours Hours Hours Hours Hours Hours Hours
BCC Long Stay £2.70 £5.40 £8.10 £10.80 £16.20 £21.60 £32.40 £37.80
Clifton Down
Shopping Centre £1.50 £2.50 £3.50 £5.50 £12.00 £12.00 £12.00 £12.00
Trinity Centre £3.00 £4.00 £5.00 £6.00 £8.00 £9.00 £9.00 £9.00
The Galleries £2.40 £3.40 £4.40 £6.40 £8.40 £18.00 £18.00 £18.00
Cabot Circus £3.20 £4.00 £5.00 £7.00 £9.00 £20.00 £20.00 £20.00
Gardiner Haskins £3.00 £4.00 £5.00 £7.00 £11.00 £16.00 £16.00 £20.00
Bristol Temple
Meads £2.60 £7.70 £7.70 £15.80 £15.80 £15.80 £15.80 £15.80
Britannia Car Park £3.00 £6.00 £9.00 £9.00 £12.00 £15.00 £16.00 £17.00
Millennium Square £3.50 £7.00 £11.00 £11.00 £13.50 £18.00 £21.00 £25.00
NCP Pay on the Day
Rates* £3.95 £7.90 £11.85 £15.80 £23.70 £24.95 £24.95 £24.95

Page 41
NCP Pay by App
Rates* £2.95 £5.90 £8.85 £11.80 £17.70 £21.95 £21.95 £21.95
Prince Street £3.95 £7.90 £11.85 £15.80 £23.70 £26.95 £26.95 £26.95
Table 15: Comparison with other operators if both linear and inflationary increases are
applied.
A true linear tariff with inflation will significantly increase the cost of long stays. The
estimated real-world impact of that is estimated in the tables below, but it may be beneficial
to cap the total daily rate at a level that will not actively encourage users to seek out
alternative locations. £21.60 per day may be an appropriate figure.
The impact of a move to a linear tariff is obviously greater on long stay customers although
this is partially mitigated by mid-range parkers benefitting from new 5, 6 and 7 hour rates.
Using transaction level data from Trenchard and West End MSCPs, the impact has been
estimated as follows:

Linear Tariff Customer Impact:

Current Tariff
Linear Tariff
Groups
Cost Cost Cost
8am - 6pm Decreases Unchanged Increases
1 hour 0% 100% 0%
2 hours 0% 100% 0%
3 hours 0% 100% 0%
4 hours 0% 100% 0%
> 4 hours 54% 0% 46%
Evening
6pm - midnight 13% 0% 87%
Overnight
6pm - 9am 44% 0 56%
All Customers 23% 37% 39%
Table 16: Impact of linear charging on different price points
Looking in more detail at the tariff points with cost increases we can see a more nuanced
picture than the headline figures suggest:

>4 hours - £18
Linear Price Change % Customers
£12.50 -£5.50 21%
£15.00 -£3.00 17%
£17.50 -£0.50 14%
£20.00 £2.00 14%
£22.50 £4.50 15%
£25.00 £7.00 9%

Page 42
£27.50 £9.50 4%
£30.00 £12.00 3%
£32.50 £14.50 2%
£35.00 £17.00 1%
Evening (6pm - midnight) - £4
Linear Price Change % Customers
£0.00 -£4.00 1%
£2.50 -£1.50 6%
£5.00 £1.00 16%
£7.50 £3.50 41%
£10.00 £6.00 37%
£12.50 £8.50 0%
£15.00 £11.00 0%
Overnight (6pm - 9am) - £5.50
Linear Price Change % Customers
£0.00 -£5.50 15%
£2.50 -£3.00 14%
£5.00 -£0.50 15%
£7.50 £2.00 24%
£10.00 £4.50 32%
Table 17: Impact of linear charges

On Street Charges
In terms of On Street Parking (including adjacent car parks such as Queen Square and
Brunswick Square):

Up to
2/4 Hour On Up to 1 Up to 3 Up to 4 Over-
2 Eve
Street Hour Hours Hours Night
Hours
Current £3.00 £6.00 £9.00 £12.00 £4.00 £5.50
BCC with 8.7%
£3.50 £7.00 £10.50 £14.00 £4.50 £6.00
inflation
Table 18: Impact of tariff changes on street and at linked off street locations.
These tariffs can currently be purchased in multiples of 50p for the corresponding number of
minutes. An 8.7% increase is therefore rounded to the nearest 50p.
As part of a move to linear charging from 8am to 10pm the 50p increments, evening and
overnight charges will be removed and a simple hourly rate will apply. The 2 or 4 hour
maximum stay limits will be retained between 8am and 6pm to encourage turnover of
spaces, but there will be no maximum stay between 6pm and 8am the following day.

Page 43
Financial implications:
Allowing for attrition, an 8.7% inflation-based change would have the following estimated
impact:

23/24 Income Forecast Difference %
Multi Storey £3,807,440 £3,981,124 £173,684 105%
On Street £3,807,677 £4,091,357 £283,679 107%
Surface £2,782,686 £2,914,477 £131,791 105%
Total £10,397,804 £10,986,960 £589,155 106%
Table 19: Budgetary impact of inflation-based change

Allowing for attrition, a move to linear charges would have the following estimated impact:

23/24 Income Forecast Difference %
Multi Storey £3,807,440 £4,050,047 £242,607 106%
On Street £3,807,677 £4,314,778 £507,100 113%
Surface £2,782,686 £2,922,486 £139,800 105%
Total £10,397,804 £11,287,312 £889,508 109%
Table 20: Budgetary impact of linear charging

Allowing for attrition, a move to linear charges with added inflation would the following
estimated impact:

23/24 Income Forecast Difference %
Multi Storey £3,807,440 £4,221,753 £414,313 111%
On Street £3,807,677 £4,678,891 £871,213 123%
Surface £2,782,686 £3,053,632 £270,946 110%
Total £10,397,804 £11,954,277 £1,556,473 115%
Table 21: Budgetary impact of linear charging with inflation-based increase.

Page 44
Equality Impact Assessment [version 2.9]
Title– Introduction of Pay & Display parking at District Car Parks
☒ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☒ Service ☒ New
☐ Other [please state] ☐ Already exists / review ☐ Changing
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration – Management of Lead Officer name: Dominic Hitchcock
Place
Service Area: Traffic & Highways Maintenance Lead Officer role: Infrastructure Manager

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of an Equality Impact Assessment is to assist decision makers in understanding the impact of proposals
as part of their duties under the Equality Act 2010. Detailed guidance to support completion can be found here
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com).
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the process by someone with a good knowledge of the
proposal and service area, and sufficient influence over the proposal. It is good practice to take a team approach to
completing the equality impact assessment. Please contact the Equality and Inclusion Team early for advice and
feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Describe who it is aimed at and the intended aims /
outcomes. Where known also summarise the key actions you plan to undertake. Please use plain English, avoiding
jargon and acronyms. Equality Impact Assessments are viewed by a wide range of people including decision-makers
and the wider public.
Parking Services have undertaken a survey of all district car parks where parking is currently free, to determine if it
would be feasible to introduce pay and display charges. The purpose of the exercise was to determine whether
the existing time limited restrictions in the car parks were effectively delivering key aspects of the parking strategy
and deterring long stay car parking in these locations.

The number of disabled bays and their location in each car park will be reviewed to improve facilities. There will
be no charge or time limit for Blue Badge holders parking in disabled bays within the car park under the new
traffic regulation order.

There may be a disproportionate impact for carers, parents, pregnancy/maternity on the basis that they are going
to be more reliant on having their own vehicle, as well as low income families. Whilst there may be a
disproportionate impact for these groups, the proposal is justifiable on the basis that the sites are unviable
without bringing in charges, which are required to maintain the facilities, improve Car Park management by
making enforcement processes more efficient, discouraging all day parking, maximising the use of space, and
ensuring effective turnover of spaces to support the local economy. An attrition level of 25% reflects the
anticipated modal shift to sustainable/active travel.

Parking Services propose to sell 4 car parks with low occupancy as demand for parking is low and as the only
potential remaining free car parks, will operate at a cost to the service for the continued maintenance & upkeep:

Clayton St – Avonmouth & Lawrence Weston. Predominately in a residential area with unrestricted on street
parking. This car park served a social club opposite, that’s no longer in use. Demand for parking is low at this
location.
Harden Rd – Stockwood. Located next to a library and in in close proximity to local shops and medical centre.
However, despite this location, demand for parking appears to be low.
Page 45
Queens Rd – Hartcliffe & Withywood. This car park is in close proximity to the local community centre, church
and local shops. Despite this location, demand for parking is low.
Ridingleaze – Avonmouth & Lawrence Weston. This car park is in close proximity to local shops, businesses and
church. Despite this, demand for parking is low.

These wards have a relatively low proportion of minoritised ethnic residents, or non-Christian faith groups,
however they do have some relatively high pockets of deprivation.

The Car Parks with proposed charges below are attached to or serve as follows:

Beechwood Road – Frome Vale
Located in between the Beechwood Club (community hall) and Beechwood Medical Practice and a short walk to
local schools and businesses.
Callington Road – Brislington West
Located next to local shops and opposite a supermarket.
Chalks Road – St George West
Located next to St George Park. This car park also has ZedPod housing units installed on stilts, with parking
retained below. Resident’s parking is not permitted, other than in line with the current restrictions. This car park is
also a short walk from local shops & businesses on Church Road.
Derby Street – St George West
Located opposite Chalks Rd Car Park. This car park backs onto the local shops & businesses on Church Road. It’s
also directly opposite a children’s nursey and is close to the local church & primary school. There are plans to
install 8 modular housing units in the middle of this car park, reducing the capacity to 23, with parking spaces
either side of the housing units.
Ducie Road – Lawrence Hill
Located in close proximity to local shops, business, railway station, parks, church and business park
Machin Rd – Henbury & Brentry
Located to the rear of local shops & businesses. Also in close proximity to the local Schools, library community
centre & public open space.
Repton Rd – Brislington West
Located off Sandy Park Rd, this car park is a short walk from the local shops, businesses and church
Stoke View Rd – Eastville
Located off Fishponds Rd next to Stoke View Business Park and a short walk to local shops and businesses. 17
spaces are currently dedicated for permit holders.
Waverley Road – Avonmouth & Lawrence Weston
Located to the rear of Shirehampton Group Health Centre. Also in close proximity to local shops, businesses and
church.
Westbury Hill – Westbury-on-Trym & Henleaze
Westbury-on-Trym Primary Care Centre is located within the car park. This car park is also off the High Street,
serving the local shops, businesses and churches.

1.2 Who will the proposal have the potential to affect?
☐ Bristol City Council workforce ☒ Service users ☒ The wider community
☐ Commissioned services ☐ City partners / Stakeholder organisations
Additional comments:

1.3 Will the proposal have an equality impact?
Could the proposal affect access levels of representation or participation in a service, or does it have the potential to
change e.g. quality of life: health, education, or standard of living etc.?
If ‘No’ explain why you are sure there will be no equality impact, then skip steps 2-4 and request review by Equality
and Inclusion Team.
If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment, or if you plan to complete the assessment at a later stage please state
this clearly here and request review by the Equality and Inclusion Team.
Page 46
☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

Step 2: What information do we have?

2.1 What data or evidence is there which tells us who is, or could be affected?
Please use this section to demonstrate an understanding of who could be affected by the proposal. Include general
population data where appropriate, and information about people who will be affected with particular reference to
protected and other relevant characteristics: https://www.bristol.gov.uk/people-communities/measuring-equalities-
success .
Use one row for each evidence source and say which characteristic(s) it relates to. You can include a mix of
qualitative and quantitative data e.g. from national or local research, available data or previous consultations and
engagement activities.
Outline whether there is any over or under representation of equality groups within relevant services - don't forget
to benchmark to the local population where appropriate. Links to available data and reports are here Data, statistics
and intelligence (sharepoint.com). See also: Bristol Open Data (Quality of Life, Census etc.); Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA); Ward Statistical Profiles.

For workforce / management of change proposals you will need to look at the diversity of the affected teams using
available evidence such as HR Analytics: Power BI Reports (sharepoint.com) which shows the diversity profile of
council teams and service areas. Identify any over or under-representation compared with Bristol economically
active citizens for different characteristics. Additional sources of useful workforce evidence include the Employee
Staff Survey Report and Stress Risk Assessment Form

Data / Evidence Source Summary of what this tells us

[Include a reference where known]
Census 2011 and Census 2021 The Census details the demographic profile of Bristol. The first results
of the 2021 census will not be available until Spring 2022, so
demographic data is still informed by 2011 census and other
population related documents (listed below)
2011 Census Key Statistics About
Equalities Communities

The population of Bristol Updated annually. The report brings together statistics on the current
estimated population of Bristol, recent trends in population, future
projections and looks at the key characteristics of the people living in
Bristol.
New wards: data profiles The Ward Profiles provide a range of datasets, including Population,
Life Expectancy, health and education disparities etc. for each of
Bristol’s electoral wards.

Ward Profiles - Power BI tool

Bristol Quality of Life survey 2020/21 final The Quality of Life (QoL) survey is an annual randomised sample
report survey of the Bristol population, mailed to 33,000 households (with
online & paper options), and some additional targeting to boost
Quality of Life 2020-21 — Open Data numbers from low responding groups. In brief, the 2020 QoL survey
Bristol indicated that inequality and deprivation continue to affect people’s
experience in almost every element measured by the survey.

Page 47
% for whom inaccessible public
transport prevents them from
leaving their home when they want
Quality of Life Indicator to

Bristol Average 11.8

Most Deprived 10% 14.2

16 to 24 years 25.9

50 years and older 10.6

65 years and older 13.9

Female 13.9

Male 9.6

Disabled 24.7

Black, Asian and minority ethnic 13.9

Asian/Asian British 6.8

Black/Black British 13.8

Mixed/Multiple ethnic groups 19.8

White 11.5

White Minority Ethnic 12.1

White British 11.4

Christian 11.5

Other religion 9.2

No religion or faith 12.0

Single parent 15.7

Two parent 6.2

No qualifications 13.4

Owner Occupier 9.9

Rented from housing association 16.8

Rented from the council 12

Rented from private landlord 16.7

Non degree qualifications 10.6

Page 48
Degree qualifications 12.1

Part-time carer 9.9

Full-time carer 23.8

Carer (All) 13.2

Parents (All) 7.4

Lesbian, Gay or Bisexual 19.6

The following car parks have an average peak occupancy level of over 40% and are the sites where it is considered
beneficial to introduce Pay & Display parking in order to promote short stay turnover, and encourage a modal
shift away from the private car. We don’t currently know who uses the car parks but as many are in the vicinity of
local amenities it is likely that visitors to shops and health centres make up most short-term parkers, while long
term parkers might be the people who work in local area. None of the sites are in a Resident’s Parking Scheme
Area or the City Centre.
Note, the 4 car parks that are proposed to be sold are also included for reference.

It appears from the data that there is a reasonable correlation between car ownership and deprivation deciles.
These locations are likely to have the most buoyant local economies and the greatest demand for car parking –
however this masks the fact that people will travel to areas with good local shops and amenities and the use of
the car parks may not reflect the make up of the local populations.

Average No Cars
Deprivation
Spaces LSOA per household
District Car Parks Ward
IMD Decile
(Bristol = 1.04)
Avonmouth & Lawrence
Clayton Street 45 Weston E01014499 2 1.06
Avonmouth & Lawrence
Ridingleaze 20 Weston E01014638 1 1.06
Avonmouth & Lawrence
Waverley Road 37 Weston E01014493 2 1.06
Callington Road 23 Brislington West E01014535 7 1.14
Repton Road 14 Brislington West E01014531 6 1.14
Alexandra Park (Currently Closed) 24 Eastville E01014572 3 1.04
Beechwood Road 67 Frome Vale E01014590 3 1.07
Stoke View 40 Frome Vale E01014588 3 1.07
Queens Road 14 Hartcliffe & Withywood E01014595 1 0.81
Machin Road 21 Henbury & Brentry E01014605 1 1.09
Ducie Road 44 Lawrence Hill E01033356 1 0.53
Chalks Road 59 St George West E01014681 4 0.88
Derby Street 45 St George West E01014681 4 0.88
Harden Road 30 Stockwood E01014707 5 1.3
Westbury-on-Trym &
Westbury Hill 104 Henleaze E01014719 9 1.42
Total Off St 587

Page 49
2.2 Do you currently monitor relevant activity by the following protected characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☐ Gender Reassignment
☐ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☐ Pregnancy/Maternity ☒ Race
☐ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☒ Sexual Orientation

2.3 Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
Where there are gaps in the evidence, or you don’t have enough information about some equality groups, include an
equality action to find out in section 4.2 below. This doesn’t mean that you can’t complete the assessment without
the information, but you need to follow up the action and if necessary, review the assessment later. If you are
unable to fill in the gaps, then state this clearly with a justification.
For workforce related proposals all relevant characteristics may not be included in HR diversity reporting (e.g.
pregnancy/maternity). For smaller teams diversity data may be redacted. A high proportion of not known/not
disclosed may require an action to address under-reporting.
We do not hold information on the protected characteristics of these groups in respect to car ownership, and
usage of car parks however, we do have specific ward data on the protected characteristics identified above.

2.4 How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
You will nearly always need to involve and consult with internal and external stakeholders during your assessment.
The extent of the engagement will depend on the nature of the proposal or change. This should usually include
individuals and groups representing different relevant protected characteristics. Please include details of any
completed engagement and consultation and how representative this had been of Bristol’s diverse communities. See
https://www.bristol.gov.uk/people-communities/equalities-groups.
Include the main findings of any engagement and consultation in Section 2.1 above.

If you are managing a workforce change process or restructure please refer to Managing change or restructure
(sharepoint.com) for advice on consulting with employees etc. Relevant stakeholders for engagement about
workforce changes may include e.g. staff-led groups and trades unions as well as affected staff.
The approach will be agreed through the decision pathway process but initial process to determine which, if any,
sites to progress would potentially be based on:
- Sites surveys to assess usage levels
- Online consultation questionnaire
- Review with local councillors

2.5 How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
Explain how you will continue to engage with stakeholders throughout the course of planning and delivery. Please
describe where more engagement and consultation is required and set out how you intend to undertake it. Include
any targeted work to seek the views of under-represented groups. If you do not intend to undertake it, please set
out your justification. You can ask the Equality and Inclusion Team for help in targeting particular groups.
The approach will be agreed through the decision pathway process but initial process to determine which, if any,
sites to progress would potentially be based on:
- Sites surveys to assess usage levels
- Online consultation questionnaire
- Review with Local Councillors

Step 3: Who might the proposal impact?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered above, and the characteristics protected by the Equality Act 2010.
Also include details of existing issues for particular groups that you are aware of and are seeking to address or
mitigate through this proposal. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying potential impacts etc.
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com)Page 50
3.1 Does the proposal have any potentially adverse impacts on people based on their
protected or other relevant characteristics?
Consider sub-categories (different kinds of disability, ethnic background etc.) and how people with combined
characteristics (e.g. young women) might have particular needs or experience particular kinds of disadvantage.
Where mitigations indicate a follow-on action, include this in the ‘Action Plan’ Section 4.2 below.
GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many groups)
The introduction of pay and display charges will affect all users of the car park as they will have to pay for their
parking whereas currently it is free, however those on fixed or low incomes would be disproportionately impacted
by additional costs. Charges will initially be introduced at a low level to minimise the impact.

Access to disabled parking facilities will not be reduced. There will be no parking charge or time limit for vehicles
displaying a Blue Badge and parked in a Disabled Bay in any of the car parks, as is the current situation.

The final proposals will be subject to statutory consultation as part of the Traffic Regulation Order making process.

PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Age: Older People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Some older people who are less mobile and less able to walk significant distances may
be disproportionately impacted by additional costs
Mitigations: Charges will initially be introduced at a low level to minimise the impact.
Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Some Disabled people with impairments which mean they are more dependent on a
motor vehicle as a driver or passenger may be disproportionately impacted by
additional costs
Mitigations: Blue Badge holders will be able to park for free as in all other BCC Pay & Display car
parks. Charges will initially be introduced at a low level to minimise the impact.
Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Sexual orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Pregnancy / Maternity Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: People who are dependent on a motor vehicle as a driver or passenger because they
are pregnant or have young children may be disproportionately impacted by additional
costs.
Mitigations: Charges will initially be introduced at a low level to minimise the impact.
Gender reassignment Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Religion or Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Belief
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
civil partnership
Potential impacts:
Mitigations: Page 51
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS
Socio-Economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: The introduction of Pay & Display charges may have a disproportionate impact on low
income households.
Mitigations: Charges will initially be introduced at a low level to minimise the impact.
Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: People who are dependent on motor vehicles to provide care for others may be
disproportionately impacted by additional costs
Mitigations:
Other groups [Please add additional rows below to detail the impact for other relevant groups as appropriate e.g.
Asylums and Refugees; Looked after Children / Care Leavers; Homelessness]
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:

3.2 Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their protected or other
relevant characteristics?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our Public Sector Equality Duty to:
✓ Eliminate unlawful discrimination for a protected group
✓ Advance equality of opportunity between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t
✓ Foster good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t

Those in low or fixed income households may include some pensioners and those in receipt of disability
payments. These groups are likely to already be in receipt of concessions such as free public transport or
Blue Badges which partially mitigate any rise in parking charges.

The parking charge also needs to be taken in the local context. A day ticket for bus travel in the Bristol
area costs £5, a Park & Ride tickets costs £5. The proposed parking charges mean that customers can
generally park for 4 hours for £4. It would undermine the Council’s transport policies if parking in the
city centre were so cheap that it deterred people from making more sustainable travel choices.

Efficient transport policies which reduce congestion and improve public transport efficacy and air quality
will improve the environment for all residents and visitors to the city.

The Council’s policies are focussed on reducing the dependence on the private car and encouraging
those who can, to use alternative, more sustainable means of transport. These policies improve the
environment for everybody while also helping those unable to make different choices by reducing the
overall demand which in turn improves the turnover of spaces and provides more opportunity & better
services to those who need it.

The Council is actively promoting active travel through improved walking and cycling facilities and
initiatives.

Step 4: Impact

4.1 How has the equality impact assessment informed or changed the proposal?
What are the main conclusions of this assessment? Use this section to provide an overview of your findings. This
summary can be included in decision pathway reports etc.
Page 52
If you have identified any significant negative impacts which cannot be mitigated, provide a justification showing
how the proposal is proportionate, necessary, and appropriate despite this.
Summary of significant negative impacts and how they can be mitigated or justified:
Those in low or fixed income households may include some pensioners and those in receipt of disability
payments. These groups are likely to already be in receipt of concessions such as free public transport or
Blue Badges which mitigate any rise in parking charges. However, pregnant women and women with
children may be adversely affected, but we will introduce charges initially at a lower introductory rate.
Summary of positive impacts / opportunities to promote the Public Sector Equality Duty:
The Council’s policies are focussed on reducing the dependence on the private car and encouraging
those who can, to use alternative, more sustainable means of transport. These policies improve the
environment for everybody while also helping those unable to make different choices by reducing the
overall demand which in turn improves the turnover of spaces and provides more opportunity & better
services to those who need it.

4.2 Action Plan
Use this section to set out any actions you have identified to improve data, mitigate issues, or maximise
opportunities etc. If an action is to meet the needs of a particular protected group please specify this.
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale

4.3 How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
How will you know if you have been successful? Once the activity has been implemented this equality impact
assessment should be periodically reviewed to make sure your changes have been effective your approach is still
appropriate.
• Monitoring of income generation
• Review of relevant Quality of Life indicators by equalities group

Step 5: Review
The Equality and Inclusion Team need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your EqIA. EqIAs
should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers on the equalities
impact of the proposal. Please seek feedback and review from the Equality and Inclusion Team before requesting
sign off from your Director1.
Equality and Inclusion Team Review: Director Sign-Off:
Reviewed by the Equality and Inclusion Team.

Patsy Mellor, Director Management of Place
Date: 9 January 2023 Date: 9th January 2022

1
Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
Page 53
Equality Impact Assessment [version 2.12]
Title: Promote Sustainable Transport through Parking Policy
☒ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☐ New
☐ Other [please state] ☒ Already exists / review ☐ Changing
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration – Management of Lead Officer name:
Place
Service Area: Traffic & Highways Maintenance Lead Officer role: Sarah Clark

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of an Equality Impact Assessment is to assist decision makers in understanding the impact of proposals
as part of their duties under the Equality Act 2010. Detailed guidance to support completion can be found here
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com).
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the process by someone with a good knowledge of the
proposal and service area, and sufficient influence over the proposal. It is good practice to take a team approach to
completing the equality impact assessment. Please contact the Equality and Inclusion Team early for advice and
feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Describe who it is aimed at and the intended aims /
outcomes. Where known also summarise the key actions you plan to undertake. Please use plain English, avoiding
jargon and acronyms. Equality Impact Assessments are viewed by a wide range of people including decision-makers
and the wider public.
Within the context of Bristol’s Transport Policy we a proposing a range of initiatives to make more
efficient use of on and off street, public car parking spaces, while considering how the management of
these spaces can help drive behaviour change towards sustainable modes of travel; maximise the use of
kerb space (given increasing demands for car clubs, cycle hangars, scooter parking and EV charging) and
further improve air quality. These proposals are:

Inflationary increase to pay & display charges across all on and off street locations. This would increase
the hourly pay and display parking rate in RPS from £1.50 to £2 to reflect the impact of inflation since
the last price increase. Additionally, there is a recommendation that the rate should increase to £2.50
per hour in Clifton Village RPS, Kingsdown RPS and Clifton East RPS.

Discounted Parking Tariff at Temple Gate & West End Car Parks. As both these Car Parks are on the
outskirts of the City Centre, an early bird offer at these underutilised locations could encourage
customers to park on the outskirts of the city and complete their journeys on foot. West End has the
additional advantage for customers of being outside the Clean Air Zone.

Linear Parking Charges. We believe there could be benefits in reviewing the overall tariff structure to
simplify and improve the customer experience. A linear structure where the same hourly rate applies all
day would still encourage turnover, support the retail and leisure economy whilst continuing to deter
long stay parking as longer stays would be more expensive.

The potential equality impact of linked proposals relating to Residents Parking Schemes (RPS), and
District Car Park Charging which have previously been approved by Cabinet but not yet implemented,
are considered in a separate EqIA.
Page 54
1.2 Who will the proposal have the potential to affect?
☐ Bristol City Council workforce ☒ Service users ☒ The wider community
☐ Commissioned services ☐ City partners / Stakeholder organisations
Additional comments:

1.3 Will the proposal have an equality impact?
Could the proposal affect access levels of representation or participation in a service, or does it have the potential to
change e.g. quality of life: health, education, or standard of living etc.?
If ‘No’ explain why you are sure there will be no equality impact, then skip steps 2-4 and request review by Equality
and Inclusion Team.
If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment, or if you plan to complete the assessment at a later stage please state
this clearly here and request review by the Equality and Inclusion Team.

☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

Step 2: What information do we have?

2.1 What data or evidence is there which tells us who is, or could be affected?
Please use this section to demonstrate an understanding of who could be affected by the proposal. Include general
population data where appropriate, and information about people who will be affected with particular reference to
protected and other relevant characteristics: How we measure equality and diversity (bristol.gov.uk)
Use one row for each evidence source and say which characteristic(s) it relates to. You can include a mix of
qualitative and quantitative data e.g. from national or local research, available data or previous consultations and
engagement activities.
Outline whether there is any over or under representation of equality groups within relevant services - don't forget
to benchmark to the local population where appropriate. Links to available data and reports are here Data, statistics
and intelligence (sharepoint.com). See also: Bristol Open Data (Quality of Life, Census etc.); Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA); Ward Statistical Profiles.

For workforce / management of change proposals you will need to look at the diversity of the affected teams using
available evidence such as HR Analytics: Power BI Reports (sharepoint.com) which shows the diversity profile of
council teams and service areas. Identify any over or under-representation compared with Bristol economically
active citizens for different characteristics. Additional sources of useful workforce evidence include the Employee
Staff Survey Report and Stress Risk Assessment

Data / Evidence Source Summary of what this tells us

[Include a reference where known]
Census Data 2021 − Census Data tells us about the overall demographic make-up up of
the city including where particular groups are over or under-
Bristol Key Facts November 2023 represented.
− 74% of Bristolians feel that traffic congestion is a problem in their
area, and 70% think air quality and traffic pollution is a problem
locally (down from 75% last year)
− Bristol has the highest level of car availability of all the core cities
in England. 74% of households have at least one car or van

Page 55
available (E&W 77%), up from 71% in 2011. 26% of households in
Bristol have no car or van (E&W 23%).
− Levels of car availability vary widely across the city - the
proportion of households with no car range from 5% in parts of
Henleaze to as high as 74% in parts of the city centre.
− The top actions that Bristol residents feel would improve their
overall quality of life are: Better and more affordable public
transport and more reliable buses
− Of Bristolians who travelled to work in 2022, 32% did this via
“active travel”, down from 39% the year before. Of these, 14%
cycled to work, (down 4%), and 18% walked to work, (down 3%).
Categories that increased were getting the bus to work (+3%),
driving (+2%), and riding an e-scooter (+2%; new for 2022) (QoL
2022/23)
− 25% of Bristolians ride a bike at least once a week, 17% in the
most deprived areas. Usage of e-scooters - in 2022, there were
4,398,900 rides taken covering 10,933,200 km
− Despite increased numbers of people using public transport,
walking or cycling, continued level of vehicle use mean that
reported air pollution levels of nitrogen dioxide still exceed the UK
and EU air quality limits
New wards: data profiles The Ward Profiles provide a range of datasets, including Population,
Life Expectancy, health and education disparities etc. for each of
Ward Profiles - Power BI tool Bristol’s electoral wards.

Bristol Quality of Life Survey Microsoft % for whom lack of transport options
Power BI Quality of Life 2023-24 prevents them from leaving their home
Indicator: when they want to

Group Percentage
Bristol Average 22.4
10% most deprived 26.2
16 to 24 years 35.5
50 years and older 19.3
Disabled 33.1
Asian/Asian British 35.1
Black/Black British 19.8
Mixed/Multiple ethnic groups 30.7
Black, Asian and Minority
Ethnic 31.1
White Minority Ethnic 24.8
White British 20.6
Female 24.0
Male 20.5
LGB+ 34.3
Trans 36.4
Christian 20.9
Other religion 25.8
No religion or faith 22.4
Rented from housing
association 23.5
Rented from private landlord 27.3
Rented from the council 24.4
All carers 28.1
Page 56
Single parents 22.7
No qualifications 23.5
Quality of Life 2023-24
Indicator: % who drive to work

Group Percentage
Bristol Average 36.7
10% most deprived 41.7
16 to 24 years 26.8
50 years and older 40.6
Disabled 25.8
Asian/Asian British 36.1
Black/Black British 32.8
Mixed/Multiple ethnic groups 29.0
Black, Asian and Minority
Ethnic 34.5
White Minority Ethnic 30.4
White British 38.3
Female 35.7
Male 38.0
LGB+ 28.2
Trans 11.9
Christian 44.4
Other religion 36.5
No religion or faith 32.6
Rented from housing
association 30.7
Rented from private landlord 26.8
Rented from the council 30.0
All carers 43.5
Single parents 50.5
No qualifications 30.8
Quality of Life 2023-24
Indicator: % who drive to work

Group Percentage
Bristol Average 36.7
10% most deprived 41.7
16 to 24 years 26.8
50 years and older 40.6
Disabled 25.8
Asian/Asian British 36.1
Black/Black British 32.8
Mixed/Multiple ethnic groups 29.0
Black, Asian and Minority
Ethnic 34.5
White Minority Ethnic 30.4
White British 38.3
Female 35.7
Male 38.0
LGB+ 28.2
Trans 11.9
Page 57
Christian 44.4
Other religion 36.5
No religion or faith 32.6
Rented from housing
association 30.7
Rented from private landlord 26.8
Rented from the council 30.0
All carers 43.5
Single parents 50.5
No qualifications 30.8

2.2 Do you currently monitor relevant activity by the following protected characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☐ Gender Reassignment
☐ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☐ Pregnancy/Maternity ☒ Race
☐ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☒ Sexual Orientation

2.3 Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
Where there are gaps in the evidence, or you don’t have enough information about some equality groups, include an
equality action to find out in section 4.2 below. This doesn’t mean that you can’t complete the assessment without
the information, but you need to follow up the action and if necessary, review the assessment later. If you are
unable to fill in the gaps, then state this clearly with a justification.
For workforce related proposals all relevant characteristics may not be included in HR diversity reporting (e.g.
pregnancy/maternity). For smaller teams diversity data may be redacted. A high proportion of not known/not
disclosed may require an action to address under-reporting.
We do not hold information on the protected characteristics of these groups in respect to car ownership, and
usage of car parks however, we do have specific ward data on the protected characteristics identified above

2.4 How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
You will nearly always need to involve and consult with internal and external stakeholders during your assessment.
The extent of the engagement will depend on the nature of the proposal or change. This should usually include
individuals and groups representing different relevant protected characteristics. Please include details of any
completed engagement and consultation and how representative this had been of Bristol’s diverse communities.
Include the main findings of any engagement and consultation in Section 2.1 above.

If you are managing a workforce change process or restructure please refer to Managing a change process or
restructure (sharepoint.com) for advice on consulting with employees etc. Relevant stakeholders for engagement
about workforce changes may include e.g. staff-led groups and trades unions as well as affected staff.
The approach will be agreed through the decision pathway process but initial process to determine which, if any,
proposals to progress would potentially be based on: Review with local councillors/committee

2.5 How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
Explain how you will continue to engage with stakeholders throughout the course of planning and delivery. Please
describe where more engagement and consultation is required and set out how you intend to undertake it. Include
any targeted work to seek the views of under-represented groups. If you do not intend to undertake it, please set
out your justification. You can ask the Equality and Inclusion Team for help in targeting particular groups.
The approach will be agreed through the decision pathway process but initial process to determine which, if any,
proposals to progress would potentially be based on:
- Review with Local Councillors
The final proposals will be subject to statutory consultation as part of the Traffic Regulation Order making process
Page 58
Step 3: Who might the proposal impact?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered above, and the characteristics protected by the Equality Act 2010.
Also include details of existing issues for particular groups that you are aware of and are seeking to address or
mitigate through this proposal. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying potential impacts etc.
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com)

3.1 Does the proposal have any potentially adverse impacts on people based on their
protected or other relevant characteristics?
Consider sub-categories and how people with combined characteristics (e.g. young women) might have particular
needs or experience particular kinds of disadvantage.
Where mitigations indicate a follow-on action, include this in the ‘Action Plan’ Section 4.2 below.
GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many groups)
The increase in parking charges will affect all users as they will have to pay more for their parking, however those
who are more dependent on having their own vehicle or on fixed or low incomes would be disproportionately
impacted by additional costs.
Access to disabled parking facilities will not be reduced. There will be no parking charge or time limit for vehicles
displaying a valid Blue Badge.
There may be a potential negative impact for local businesses and traders if there if car parking charges lead to a
reduction in shopping etc. and dependent on the location there may be a higher proportion of Black and
minoritised ethnic led businesses affected.

However other elements of the proposals may provide partial mitigation for these potential issues such as
Increased turnover of parking spaces; Improved transparency of parking tariffs; increased desirability of
sustainable transport modes; and enhance ability to adapt to climate change through reallocation of road space.

PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Bristol has a younger age profile in comparison to the national average (This is partly
due to the large number of students living in Bristol during term time who are counted
as part of the usually resident population). Some areas of Bristol e.g. Central, Clifton
have significantly higher proportion of young people, however car ownership is likely to
be lower.
Young people in Bristol are more likely to find inaccessible public transport prevents
them from leaving their home when they want to
Children in the most deprived areas are over five times (5.25) more likely to be injured
in motor traffic collisions than those in the least deprived areas
Mitigations: See general comments
Age: Older People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Some older people who are less mobile and less able to walk significant distances may
be disproportionately impacted by additional costs. Older people are more reliant on
public and community transport, and more likely to be an unpaid carer
Mitigations: See general comments
Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Some Disabled people with impairments which mean they are more dependent on a
motor vehicle as a driver or passenger may be disproportionately impacted by
additional costs
Mitigations: Blue Badge holders will be able to park for free as they currently do.
Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Women are more likely to have unpaid caring responsibilities for children and older
adults and this may mean they are more reliant on having their own transport and
parking. Page 59
Mitigations:
Sexual orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Pregnancy / Maternity Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: People who are dependent on a motor vehicle as a driver or passenger because they
are pregnant or have young children may be disproportionately impacted by additional
costs.
Mitigations:
Gender reassignment Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Religion or Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Belief
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
civil partnership
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS
Socio-Economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: The introduction of Pay & Display charges may have a disproportionate impact on low
income households.
Mitigations:
Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: People who are dependent on motor vehicles to provide care for others may be
disproportionately impacted by additional costs. About 4 in 9 (45.3%) say caring
responsibilities prevent them from leaving their home when they want to and almost 1
in 7 (14.3%) are prevented from getting involved in their community due to accessibility
issues.
Mitigations:
Other groups [Please add additional rows below to detail the impact for any other relevant groups as appropriate e.g.
asylum seekers and refugees; care experienced; homelessness; armed forces personnel and veterans]
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:

3.2 Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their protected or other
relevant characteristics?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our Public Sector Equality Duty to:
✓ Eliminate unlawful discrimination for a protected group
✓ Advance equality of opportunity between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t
✓ Foster good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t

Page 60
Those in low or fixed income households may include some pensioners and those in receipt of disability
payments. These groups are likely to already be in receipt of concessions such as free public transport or
Blue Badges which partially mitigate any rise in parking charges.

Efficient transport policies which reduce congestion and improve public transport efficacy and air quality
will improve the environment for all residents and visitors to the city.

The Council’s policies are focussed on reducing the dependence on the private car and encouraging
those who can, to use alternative, more sustainable means of transport. These policies improve the
environment for everybody while also helping those unable to make different choices by reducing the
overall demand which in turn improves the turnover of spaces and provides more opportunity & better
services to those who need it.

The Council is actively promoting active travel through improved walking and cycling facilities and
initiatives.

Step 4: Impact

4.1 How has the equality impact assessment informed or changed the proposal?
What are the main conclusions of this assessment? Use this section to provide an overview of your findings. This
summary can be included in decision pathway reports etc.
If you have identified any significant negative impacts which cannot be mitigated, provide a justification showing
how the proposal is proportionate, necessary, and appropriate despite this.
Summary of significant negative impacts and how they can be mitigated or justified:
Those in low or fixed income households may include some pensioners and those in receipt of disability
payments. These groups are likely to already be in receipt of concessions such as free public transport or
Blue Badges which mitigate any rise in parking charges. However, carers and those who are pregnant or
have dependent children may be disproportionately impacted. Decision makers should have due regard
to potential impacts when assessing whether they think the proposals are justified and proportionate in
the context of overall city ambitions and the need to develop sustainable and affordable solutions.
Summary of positive impacts / opportunities to promote the Public Sector Equality Duty:
The Council’s policies are focussed on reducing the dependence on the private car and encouraging
those who can, to use alternative, more sustainable means of transport. These policies aim to improve
the environment for everybody while also helping those unable to make different choices by reducing
the overall demand which in turn improves the turnover of spaces and provides more opportunity &
better services to those who need it.

4.2 Action Plan
Use this section to set out any actions you have identified to improve data, mitigate issues, or maximise
opportunities etc. If an action is to meet the needs of a particular protected group please specify this.
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale

4.3 How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
How will you know if you have been successful? Once the activity has been implemented this equality impact
assessment should be periodically reviewed to make sure your changes have been effective your approach is still
appropriate.
• Page 61
• Review of relevant Quality of Life indicators by equalities group

Step 5: Review
The Equality and Inclusion Team need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your EqIA. EqIAs
should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers on the equalities
impact of the proposal. Please seek feedback and review from the Equality and Inclusion Team before requesting
sign off from your Director1.
Equality and Inclusion Team Review: Director Sign-Off:
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

Date: 15/8/2024 Date: 15/08/2024

1
Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
Page 62
Equality Impact Assessment [version 2.9]
Title: Promote sustainable transport through parking policy (RPS)
☒ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☒ New
☐ Other [please state] ☐ Already exists / review ☐ Changing
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration – Economy of Lead Officer name: Jacob Pryor
Place and Management of Place
Service Area: City Transport and Highways and Traffic Lead Officer role: Transport Policy

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of an Equality Impact Assessment is to assist decision makers in understanding the impact of proposals
as part of their duties under the Equality Act 2010. Detailed guidance to support completion can be found here
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com).
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the process by someone with a good knowledge of the
proposal and service area, and sufficient influence over the proposal. It is good practice to take a team approach to
completing the equality impact assessment. Please contact the Equality and Inclusion Team early for advice and
feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Describe who it is aimed at and the intended aims /
outcomes. Where known also summarise the key actions you plan to undertake. Please use plain English, avoiding
jargon and acronyms. Equality Impact Assessments are viewed by a wide range of people including decision-makers
and the wider public.
The proposal seeks to make 8 changes to the existing Resident Parking Schemes as follows:

- Increasing the cost of the 1st permit from £56/annum to £178/annum and introducing an
inflationary increase every year thereafter to be agreed by Full Council.

- Realignment of the pricing of the St Phillips and Easton Resident Parking Schemes with other
Resident Parking Schemes.

- Apply a 22% inflationary increase to business, customer, medical and trader permits.

- Increase the cost of visitor permits so that they cost the same as the hourly Pay and Display rate,
and reduce the overall number available. (Noting that this does not apply to Essential Visitor
Permits given to residents with care needs).

- Increase Pay and Display fees from £1.50/hour to £2/hour.

- Increase Clifton Village, Clifton East & Kingsdown RPS Pay and Display fees from £1.50/hour to
£2.50/hour to manage demand in these areas.

• Removal of 30 minutes free parking in Pay and Display bays

Page 63
1.2 Who will the proposal have the potential to affect?
☐ Bristol City Council workforce ☒ Service users ☒ The wider community
☐ Commissioned services ☐ City partners / Stakeholder organisations
Additional comments: All residents and businesses located within ES RPS and potentially all visitors too.

1.3 Will the proposal have an equality impact?
Could the proposal affect access levels of representation or participation in a service, or does it have the potential to
change e.g. quality of life: health, education, or standard of living etc.?
If ‘No’ explain why you are sure there will be no equality impact, then skip steps 2-4 and request review by Equality
and Inclusion Team.
If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment, or if you plan to complete the assessment at a later stage please state
this clearly here and request review by the Equality and Inclusion Team.

☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

Step 2: What information do we have?

2.1 What data or evidence is there which tells us who is, or could be affected?
Please use this section to demonstrate an understanding of who could be affected by the proposal. Include general
population data where appropriate, and information about people who will be affected with particular reference to
protected and other relevant characteristics: https://www.bristol.gov.uk/people-communities/measuring-equalities-
success .
Use one row for each evidence source and say which characteristic(s) it relates to. You can include a mix of
qualitative and quantitative data e.g. from national or local research, available data or previous consultations and
engagement activities.
Outline whether there is any over or under representation of equality groups within relevant services - don't forget
to benchmark to the local population where appropriate. Links to available data and reports are here Data, statistics
and intelligence (sharepoint.com). See also: Bristol Open Data (Quality of Life, Census etc.); Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA); Ward Statistical Profiles.

For workforce / management of change proposals you will need to look at the diversity of the affected teams using
available evidence such as HR Analytics: Power BI Reports (sharepoint.com) which shows the diversity profile of
council teams and service areas. Identify any over or under-representation compared with Bristol economically
active citizens for different characteristics. Additional sources of useful workforce evidence include the Employee
Staff Survey Report and Stress Risk Assessment Form

Page 64
Data / Summary of what this tells us
Evidence
Source
RPS scheme The RPS and CPZ cover Bristol city centre and the immediate surrounding neighbourhoods
map including:

- Bedminster East
- Bower Ashton
- Clifton East
- Clifton Village
- Cliftonwood and Hotwells
- Cotham
- Cotham North
- East and St Phillips
- Redcliffe
- Redland
- Southville
- Spike Island
- St Pauls

Smaller schemes also exist on Edward and Chatsworth Road, Pitlochry Close and Cheswick Village
within the Bristol local authority boundary. The map below shows the RPS and CPZ inc. Edward
and Chatsworth Road and the second map shows Pitlochry Close and Cheswick Village

Page 65
It is important to note that RPS and CPZ boundaries do not trace local ward boundaries. With
much of our data at the ward level this can present some challenges with interpretation of
relevant datasets. That said it is possible to draw some broad themes and conclusions. The list of
wards that contain RPS/CPZ schemes can be found below:

- Ashley
- Bedminster
- Brislington West
- Central
- Clifton
- Clifton Down
- Cotham
- Horfield
- Hotwells and Harbourside
- Lawrence Hill
- Lockleaze
- Redland
- Southville

Car
Ownership The proposal impacts residents who have access to a vehicle living in an RPS area, therefore it is
(Census important to understand the levels of car ownership across the city.
2021)
Car availability: On average across Bristol 45.8% of households have access to 1 car or van; 21.6%
have access to two cars of vans and 6.4% have access to 3 or more cars or vans. 26.2% of residents
have no access to a car or a van. Against that baseline, the data for areas impacted by the
proposal show the following results. Any significant deviations from the baseline have been
highlighted bold for ease of interpretation:

Page 66
Ashley: 46.2% (3844 households) with access to one car or van; 14.6% (1218 households) with
access to 2 cars or vans; 3.8% (320 households) with access to 3 or more cars or vans. 35.3% (2940
households) with no access to a car or van.

Bedminster: 49.1% (2839 households) with access to one car or van; 20.1% (1163 households)
with access to 2 cars or vans; 4.9% (281 households) with access to 3 or more cars or vans. 25.9%
(1497 households) with no access to a car or van.

Brislington West: 50% (2498 households) with access to one car or van; 22.8% (1138 households)
with access to 2 cars or vans; 7.1% (356 households) with access to 3 or more cars or vans. 20.2%
(1008 households) with no access to a car or van.

Central: 34.6% (2245 households) with access to one car or van; 6.8% (440 households) with
access to 2 cars or vans; 1.3% (83 households) with access to 3 or more cars or vans. 57.3% (3720
households) with no access to a car or van.

Clifton: 47.2% (2676 households) with access to one car or van; 18.6% (1055 households) with
access to 2 cars or vans; 4.7% (264 households) with access to 3 or more cars or vans. 29.5% (1673
households) with no access to a car or van

Clifton Down: 45% (2212 households) with access to one car or van; 18.2% (893 households) with
access to 2 cars or vans; 6% (294 households) with access to 3 or more cars or vans. 30.9% (1521
households) with no access to a car or van

Cotham: 46.9% (2257 households) with access to one car or van; 19.2% (921 households) with
access to 2 cars or vans; 5.1% (246 households) with access to 3 or more cars or vans. 28.8% (1384
households) with no access to a car or van.

Horfield: 46.4% (2522 households) with access to one car or van; 23.7% (1287 households) with
access to 2 cars or vans; 7.3% (396 households) with access to 3 or more cars or vans. 22.6% (1225
households) with no access to a car or van.

Hotwells and Harbourside: 48% (1359 households) with access to one car or van; 9.6% (271
households) with access to 2 cars or vans; 2.5% (71 households) with access to 3 or more cars or
vans. 39.9% (1131 households) with no access to a car or van.

Lawrence Hill: 41.1% (3148 households) with access to one car or van; 9.4% (717 households)
with access to 2 cars or vans; 1.6% (125 households) with access to 3 or more cars or vans. 47.9%
(3662 households) with no access to a car or van.

Lockleaze: 46.4% (2317 households) with access to one car or van; 21.3% (1061 households) with
access to 2 cars or vans; 8% (401 households) with access to 3 or more cars or vans. 24.3% (1213
households) with no access to a car or van.

Redland: 48.5% (2505 households) with access to one car or van; 26.5% (1366 households) with
access to 2 cars or vans; 7.3% (376 households) with access to 3 or more cars or vans. 17.7% (915
households) with no access to a car or van.

Southville: 49.1% (2837 households) with access to one car of van; 15.3% (885 households) with
access to 2 cars of vans; 3.3% (191 households) with access to 3 or more cars of vans. 32.2%
(1861 households) with no access to a car or van

In terms of car ownership the wards affected are either very close to city average or significantly
less reliant on (or unable to afford) a car/cars or a van/vans.

Page 67
Deprivation Deprivation data from the census (see here) may provide some insight into the ability of residents
(Indices of to meet the cost of the new tariffs. We should treat this data with caution as it is not possible to
Multiple draw a direct link between more financially deprived residents and car ownership e.g. someone
Deprivation may be in financial hardship but not be impacted by the proposals because they don’t (or can’t
afford to) own a car.
2019)
Overall, the deprivation data shows a mixed picture across the wards affected by this proposal.
Wards such as Ashley, Brislington West, Central, Lawrence Hill and Lockleaze contain areas among
the top 10% most deprived in the country. Conversely wards such as Clifton, Clifton Down,
Redland and Southville contain some of the top 10 and 20% least deprived areas in the country.

Almost all the wards contain a diverse range of more and less deprived areas.

Of those wards with overall higher levels of deprivation there is a general trend that overall car
ownership is lower. For instance, most of Lawrence Hill is in the top 10 most deprived areas of the
country but contains much lower levels of car ownership than the city average.

Religion The table below shows the overall representation from 2021 Census data, of different faith groups
and Belief and those with no religious beliefs in the city.
(Census
2021) No religion 37.4%
Christian 32.2%
Buddhist 0.6%
Hindu 0.8%
Jewish 0.3%
Muslim 6.7%
Sikh 0.5%
Other religion 0.8%
Not answered 6.9%

More information about particular differences in the representation of different faith groups at a
locality level can be found in the Census Data Tool (see here)

The data shows that of the 13 wards affected by this proposal, 8 of them had significantly (>5%)
lower populations of religious people and had higher populations of people with no religion. Only
Lawrence Hill and Lockleaze had significantly higher religious populations than the city average.

Population Age profile data across the different wards impacted by this proposal can be found here and can
Age Profile be compared to the total Bristol population average below:
(Census
2021) Bristol: Total population = 472,465
Aged 0-15 years = 16.6%, 78,280 people
Aged 16-24 years = 16.3%, 77,159 people
Aged 25-34 years = 18.7%, 88,256 people
Aged 35-49 years = 20.3%, 96,078 people
Aged 50-64 years = 15.2%, 71,935 people
Aged 65+ years = 12.9%, 60,760 people

Many of the wards affected by the proposal are broadly in line with Bristol’s overall age
distribution. That said almost half of the wards (6 out of 13) have relatively young populations
compared to the city average. Some of this is likely to be down to larger student populations such
as in the Central Area, Clifton, Clifton Down, Cotham and Hotwells and Harbourside with Lawrence
Hill the potential outlier in this regard.

Page 68
Population The table below shows the overall representation from 2021 Census data, by broad ethnicity
Ethnicity categories in Bristol. However there are significant differences in particular localities. For more
(Census information about particular differences in the representation of different ethnicity groups at a
2021) locality level see the Census Data Profile tool.

Bristol ethnicity groups 2021 Census
Asian or Asian British 6.6%
Black or Black British 5.9%
Mixed or multiple ethnic groups 4.5%
White Other 9.5%
White British 71.6%
Other ethnic background 1.9%
All Black Asian and minoritised
ethnic 18.9%

The data below shows the aggregated levels of representation for all Black, Asian and minoritised
ethnic groups, compared to the White population in the Wards affected by this proposal.
Significant deviations are highlighted in bold.

Bristol: Total population = 472,465
White total = 81.1%, 383,140 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic* total = 18.9%, 89,325 people
*Asian/Asian British, Black/Black British, Multiple/Mixed groups, Other ethnic group

Ashley: Total population = 20,004
White total = 69.8%, 13,960 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic total = 30.2%, 6044 people

Bedminster: Total population = 12,916
White total = 92%, 11,886 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic total = 8%, 1030 people

Brislington West: Total population = 11,880
White total = 88.8%, 10,545 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic total = 11.2%, 1335 people

Central: Total population = 18,391
White total = 65.7%, 12,077 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic total = 34.3%, 6314 people

Clifton: Total population = 13,022
White total = 85.9%, 11,185 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic total = 14.1%, 1837 people

Clifton Down: Total population = 11,428
White total = 85.1%, 9728 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic total = 14.9%, 1700 people

Cotham: Total population = 11,524
White total = 86.8%, 10,002 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic total = 13.2%, 1522 people

Horfield: Total population = 13,839
White total = 80.5%, 11,136 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic total = 19.5%, 2703 people
Page 69
Hotwells and Harbourside: Total population = 6034 people
White total = 75.1%, 4534 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic total = 24.9%, 1500 people

Lawrence Hill: Total population = 19,604
White total = 42.9%, 8417 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic total = 57.1%, 11,187 people

Lockleaze: Total population = 13,394
White total = 67.8%, 9078 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic total = 32.2%, 4316 people

Redland: Total population = 13,259
White total = 88.3%, 11,714 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic total = 11.7%, 1545 people

Southville: Total population = 12,880
White total = 88.6%, 11,416 people
Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic total = 11.4%, 1464 people

The data shows that of the wards affected the majority (9 out of 13) are broadly in line with the
city average. Ashley, Central, Lawrence Hill and Lockleaze have significantly lower proportions of
people from a white background and higher representation among black, Asian and minority
ethnic groups.

Health and Using the Census 2021 definition of Disability - the data below shows the number of households
Disability with at least one Disabled person in wards affected by this proposal. Significant deviations are
(Census highlighted in bold
2021)
Bristol: Total households = 191,637
Households with at least one Disabled person= 32.2%, 61,731 households

Ashley: Total households = 8322
Households with at least one Disabled person= 30.2%, 2511

Bedminster: Total households = 5780
Households with at least one Disabled person= 29.6%, 1711

Brislington West: Total households = 5000
Households with at least one Disabled person= 29.2%, 1458

Central: Total households = 6488
Households with at least one Disabled person= 25.1%, 1629

Clifton: Total households = 5668
Households with at least one Disabled person= 25%, 1416

Clifton Down: Total households = 4920
Households with at least one Disabled person= 24.7%, 1216

Cotham: Total households = 4808
Households with at least one Disabled person= 26.6%, 1278

Horfield: Total households = 5430
Households with at least one Disabled person= 33.3%, 1806
Page 70
Hotwells and Harbourside: Total households = 2833
Households with at least one Disabled person= 22.9%, 650

Lawrence Hill: Total households = 7652
Households with at least one Disabled person= 32.2%, 2461

Lockleaze: Total households = 4992
Households with at least one Disabled person= 38.1%, 1901

Redland: Total households = 5162
Households with at least one Disabled person= 24.8%, 1282

Southville: Total households = 5774
Households with at least one Disabled person= 27.4%, 1584

The data shows that all but one of the wards (Lockleaze) are either in line with the city average or
significantly lower than the city average.
Sexual The 2021 census data on sexual orientation is only available to view at Middle Super Output Area
Orientation (MSOA) and higher geography levels. This is different to the data above which has been presented
(Census on a ward level.
2021)
Bristol: Total population = 389,708
LGB+* population = 6.07%, 23,649
Straight or Heterosexual = 85.45%, 333,008
Not stated = 8.48%, 33,051
*includes gay or lesbian, bisexual, pansexual, asexual, queer and other groups

Barton Hill: Profile population = 5763
LGB+ population = 5.22%, 301 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 82.86%, 4775 people
Not stated = 11.92%, 687 people

Bedminster: Profile population = 9006
LGB+ population = 7.92%, 713 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 83.77%, 7544 people
Not stated = 8.32%, 749 people

City Centre and Harbourside: Profile population = 7631
LGB+ population = 12.8%, 977 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 75.19%, 5738 people
Not stated = 12%, 916 people

Clifton East: Profile population = 8484
LGB+ population = 9.29%, 788 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 82.08%, 6964 people
Not stated = 8.63%, 732 people

Clifton Village: Profile population = 5599
LGB+ population = 8.25%, 462 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 84.19%, 4714 people
Not stated = 7.55%, 423 people

Cotham: Profile population = 8117
LGB+ population = 8.81%, 715 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 82.65%, 6709 people
Not stated = 8.54%, 693 people
Page 71
Hotwells: Profile population = 6382
LGB+ population = 11.09%, 708 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 78.77%, 5027 people
Not stated = 10.14%, 647 people

Kingsdown: Profile population = 7931
LGB+ population = 10.26%, 814 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 79.74%, 6324 people
Not stated = 10%, 793 people

Redland and St Andrews: Profile population = 8921
LGB+ population = 8.35%, 745 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 83.21%, 7423 people
Not stated = 8.44%, 753 people

Southville: Profile population = 9353
LGB+ population = 7.78%, 728 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 84.95%, 7945 people
Not stated = 7.27%, 680 people

St Pauls: Profile population = 6479
LGB+ population = 10.13%, 656 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 78.3%, 5073 people
Not stated = 11.58%, 750 people

St Werburghs: Profile population = 5685
LGB+ population = 9.82%, 558 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 78.33%, 4453 people
Not stated = 11.86%, 674 people

Temple Meads: Profile population = 8801
LGB+ population = 11.57%, 1018 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 75.2%, 6618 people
Not stated = 13.24%, 1165 people

University and Brandon Hill: Profile population = 8142
LGB+ population = 11.69%, 952 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 77.32%, 6295 people
Not stated = 10.99%, 895 people

Westbury Park: Profile population = 7150
LGB+ population = 5.01%, 358 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 86.84%, 6209 people
Not stated = 8.15%, 583 people

The following RPS streets are very small locations in much larger Middle Super Output Areas
(MSOAs), the data has been included for completeness.

Lockleaze: Profile population = 6150
LGB+ population = 3.93%, 242 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 86.44%, 5316 people
Not stated = 9.63%, 592 people

Monks Park: Profile population = 5613
LGB+ population = 5.34%, 300 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 86.64%, 4863 people
Not stated = 8.02%, 450 people Page 72
St Annes: Profile population = 8203
LGB+ population = 5.63%, 462 people
Straight or Heterosexual = 87.1%, 7145 people
Not stated = 7.27%, 596 people

The data shows that of the MSOA areas affected by the proposal, the proportion of people in the
LGB+ population are broadly in line with the city average. Larger populations (>10%) of LGB+
people can be found in City Centre and Harbourside, Hotwells, Kingsdown, St Pauls, Temple Meads
and University and Brandon Hill, with Lockleaze the only MSOA with a noticeably lower population
of LGB+ residents.

Gender The 2021 census data on gender identity is only available to view at Middle Super Output Area
Identity (MSOA) and higher geography levels. This is different to the data above which has been presented
(Census on a ward level.
2021)
Bristol: Total population = 389,708
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 0.83%, 3220 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 92.45%, 360,274 people
Not stated = 6.73%, 26,214 people
*Gender identity different from sex registered at birth

Barton Hill: Profile population = 5764
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 2.43%, 140 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 85.44%, 4925 people
Not stated = 12.13%, 699 people

Bedminster: Profile population = 9006
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 0.64%, 58 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 93.17%, 8391 people
Not stated = 6.18%, 557 people

City Centre and Harbourside: Profile population = 7627
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 1.32%, 101 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 89.13%, 6798 people
Not stated = 9.55%, 728 people

Clifton East: Profile population = 8484
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 0.59%, 50 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 93.56%, 7938 people
Not stated = 5.85%, 496 people

Clifton Village: Profile population = 5597
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 0.68%, 38 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 93.87%, 5254 people
Not stated = 5.45%, 305 people

Cotham: Profile population = 8121
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 0.69%, 56 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 93.46%, 7590 people
Not stated = 5.85%, 475 people

Hotwells: Profile population = 6380
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 1.05%, 67 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 92.18%, 5881 people
Not stated = 6.77%, 432 people
Page 73
Kingsdown: Profile population = 7931
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 1.13%, 90 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 91.1%, 7225 people
Not stated = 7.77%, 616 people

Redland and St Andrews: Profile population = 8923
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 0.83%, 74 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 93.15%, 8312 people
Not stated = 6.02%, 537 people

Southville: Profile population = 9354
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 1.06%, 99 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 93.86%, 8780 people
Not stated = 5.08%, 475 people

St Pauls: Profile population = 6478
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 1.56%, 101 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 89.3%, 5785 people
Not stated = 9.14%, 592 people

St Werburghs: Profile population = 5684
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 1.6%, 91 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 88.88%, 5052 people
Not stated = 9.52%, 541 people

Temple Meads: Profile population = 8802
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 1.69%, 149 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 87.29%, 7683 people
Not stated = 11.02%, 970 people

University and Brandon Hill: Profile population = 8141
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 1.15%, 94 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 90.5%, 7368 people
Not stated = 8.34%, 679 people

Westbury Park: Profile population = 7152
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 0.46%, 33 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 93.88%, 6714 people
Not stated = 5.66%, 405 people

The following RPS streets are very small locations in much larger Middle Super Output Areas
(MSOAs), the data has been included for completeness.

Lockleaze: Profile population = 6152
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 0.75%, 46 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 91.04%, 5601 people
Not stated = 8.21%, 505 people

Monks Park: Profile population = 5613
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 0.82%, 46 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 92.54%, 5194 people
Not stated = 6.65%, 373 people

St Annes: Profile population = 8203
Gender identity different from sex registered at birth = 0.69%, 57 people
Gender identity the same as sex registered at birth = 93.6%, 7678 people
Not stated = 5.71%, 468 people Page 74
The data shows that of the MSOA areas affected by the proposal, the proportion of people with a
gender that is different from their sex recorded at birth, is broadly in line with the city average.
Larger populations of people with a gender different from their sex recorded at birth are living in
Barton Hill, City Centre and Harbourside, St Pauls, St Werburghs and Temple Meads.

Sex profile The data below shows the population by Sex across the wards affected by the proposal
(Census
2021) Bristol:
Male: 49.6%
Female: 50.4%

Ashley
Male: 50.7%, 10,141
Female: 49.3%, 9,862

Bedminster
Male: 49.9%, 6,446
Female: 50.1%, 6,470

Brislington West
Male: 49.7%, 5,901
Female: 50.3%, 5,979

Central
Male: 51.7%, 9,508
Female: 48.3%, 8,882

Clifton
Male: 49%, 6,375
Female: 51%, 6,647

Clifton Down
Male: 49.2%, 5,613
Female: 50.8%, 5,807

Cotham
Male: 49%, 5,641
Female: 51%, 5,880

Horfield
Male: 51%, 7,055
Female: 49%, 6,783

Hotwells and Harbourside
Male: 52.2%, 3,149
Female: 47.8%, 2,886

Lawrence Hill
Male: 51.7%, 10,137
Female: 48.3%, 9,467

Lockleaze
Male: 50.1%, 6,708
Female: 49.9%, 6,688

Redland Page 75
Male: 49.5%, 6,556
Female: 50.5%, 6,697

Southville
Male: 50.7%, 6,532
Female: 49.3%, 6,350

The data shows that of the wards affected by the proposal the sex profile is close to the city
average in all cases.

BCC Permit Bristol City Council’s permit data (see Appendix B) provides a record of the number of permits
data issued across the RPS areas.

Approx
Number
First
RPS Free VP Paid VP P&D
Permit
Hours
bought

Easton & St Philips 1,252 16,518 1,579 76,000
Bedminster East 619 7,146 839 71,000
Bower Ashton 37 1,177 108 7,000
Clifton East 2,513 43,831 5,890 337,000
Clifton Village 2,953 68,461 10,021 637,000
Cliftonwood & Hotwells 1,671 40,061 5,174 77,000
Cotham 1,917 25,004 2,747 87,000
Cotham North 2,115 29,568 3,290 94,000
Cheswick Village 81 946 11 N/A
Edward Road & Chatsworth
101 3,107 437 N/A
Road
Kingsdown 1,603 36,769 4,792 295,000
Montpelier 1,302 18,581 1,937 34,000
Redcliffe 311 7,789 1,040 30,000
Redland 834 12,717 1,571 35,000
Southville 2,828 66,052 8,672 146,000
Spike Island 168 4472 524 34,000
St Pauls 1,068 13,296 1,368 38,000
Total 21,373 395,495 50,000 1,998,000
Additional comments:

2.2 Do you currently monitor relevant activity by the following protected characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☐ Gender Reassignment
☐ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☐ Pregnancy/Maternity ☒ Race
☐ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☒ Sexual Orientation

2.3 Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
Where there are gaps in the evidence, or you don’t have enough information about some equality groups, include an
equality action to find out in section 4.2 below. This doesn’t mean that you can’t complete the assessment without
the information, but you need to follow up the action and if necessary, review the assessment later. If you are
unable to fill in the gaps, then state this clearly with a justification.

Page 76
For workforce related proposals all relevant characteristics may not be included in HR diversity reporting (e.g.
pregnancy/maternity). For smaller teams diversity data may be redacted. A high proportion of not known/not
disclosed may require an action to address under-reporting.
We do not currently measure protected characteristics of service users in RPS/CPZ areas. This is a significant gap
in the data which will need to be addressed. We hold current Ward level and/or MSOA data for most protected
characteristics which have been presented in section 2.1 in this report. Notable gaps are data around pregnancy
and maternity and marital status.

Another gap in our data is the profile of visitors to RPS areas which would be difficult, costly and time consuming
to establish across the impacted area due to extensive surveying work that would be required.

2.4 How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
You will nearly always need to involve and consult with internal and external stakeholders during your assessment.
The extent of the engagement will depend on the nature of the proposal or change. This should usually include
individuals and groups representing different relevant protected characteristics. Please include details of any
completed engagement and consultation and how representative this had been of Bristol’s diverse communities. See
https://www.bristol.gov.uk/people-communities/equalities-groups.
Include the main findings of any engagement and consultation in Section 2.1 above.

If you are managing a workforce change process or restructure please refer to Managing change or restructure
(sharepoint.com) for advice on consulting with employees etc. Relevant stakeholders for engagement about
workforce changes may include e.g. staff-led groups and trades unions as well as affected staff.
The changes to the tariffs are in line with established transport policy to manage parking efficiently and ensure
that car use is priced fairly compared to sustainable modes. Policies such as the Bristol Transport Strategy and
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 which establish these principles at the local and sub-regional level have been subject
to public consultation.

The proposal is being brought to Committee for consideration by members of the public, councillors, and key
stakeholder groups.

2.5 How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
Explain how you will continue to engage with stakeholders throughout the course of planning and delivery. Please
describe where more engagement and consultation is required and set out how you intend to undertake it. Include
any targeted work to seek the views of under-represented groups. If you do not intend to undertake it, please set
out your justification. You can ask the Equality and Inclusion Team for help in targeting particular groups.
We do not intend to carry out any further advance public consultation prior to the changes being delivered,
although the proposal will be kept under review. If approved the changes will be communicated on the RPS
webpage to new and existing RPS/CPZ permit holders. The process for implementing each change will require a
change to the underlying Traffic Regulation Order. The process will vary depending on the change being made,
but material changes to the way the RPS operate will be subject to full statutory consultation and any objections
will be considered.

Step 3: Who might the proposal impact?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered above, and the characteristics protected by the Equality Act 2010.
Also include details of existing issues for particular groups that you are aware of and are seeking to address or
mitigate through this proposal. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying potential impacts etc.
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com)

Page 77
3.1 Does the proposal have any potentially adverse impacts on people based on their
protected or other relevant characteristics?
Consider sub-categories (different kinds of disability, ethnic background etc.) and how people with combined
characteristics (e.g. young women) might have particular needs or experience particular kinds of disadvantage.
Where mitigations indicate a follow-on action, include this in the ‘Action Plan’ Section 4.2 below.
GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many groups)
The increase in parking charges will affect all users as they will have to pay more for their parking, however those
who are more dependent on having their own vehicle or on fixed or low incomes would be disproportionately
impacted by additional costs.

Access to disabled parking facilities will not be reduced. There will be no parking charge or time limit for vehicles
displaying a valid Blue Badge.

There may be a potential negative impact for local businesses and traders if there if car parking charges lead to a
reduction in shopping etc. and dependent on the location there may be a higher proportion of Black
and minoritised ethnic led businesses affected.

However other elements of the proposals may provide partial mitigation for these potential issues such as
Increased turnover of parking spaces; Improved transparency of parking tariffs; increased desirability of
sustainable transport modes.

While data is available for most protected characteristic groups affected by the proposal there are
notable gaps around pregnancy and maternity and marital status. As described in section 2.1 the ward
and MSOA data does not trace the boundaries of the RPS or CPZ schemes which presents some
challenges with interpreting the data. That said there are some trends and themes that can be
extrapolated from the data that help us to understand how the proposal might affect people differently
because their characteristics and circumstances, and the extent to which this may be mitigated.

PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: • The analysis of ward age profiles in section 2.1 identified 6 of the 13
wards impacted by the proposal have a higher-than-average population
of young people.
• Younger people are often less financially independent with a greater
percentage than the city average reporting that they find it ‘difficult to
manage financially’ (QoL, 2023).
• Young people in Bristol are more likely to find inaccessible public
transport prevents them from leaving their home when they want to
Mitigations / • Younger people generally have more limited car access and lower car use
comments: and are more reliant on public transport (access to transport and life
opportunities, NatCen, 2019, Bristol QoL, 2023).
• Vehicle ownership tends to be low among younger age groups partly due
to the costs of learning to drive, as well as maintaining a vehicle and the
associated insurance costs, making this group increasingly reliant on
public transport (FS13 Future of Transport –Equalities and access to
opportunity, FS13 Rapid Evidence Review, Department for Transport,
2020)
• It could be inferred that in broad terms most younger people are less
likely to be able to afford to own and maintain a vehicle and as such this
proposal is unlikely to have a disproportionate impact on this group. That
said some younger people will find it difficult to meet increased costs as
likely to be less financially
Page 78 insecure.
Age: Older People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: • Older people in Bristol are more reliant on public and community
transport
• Some older people may be more dependent on having their own vehicle
due to limited mobility
• Overall, the QoL 2023 reports that a significantly lower proportion of
older people ‘find it difficult to manage financially’ but this contrasts with
national studies which suggest that this group is more at risk of
‘transport poverty’ (Transport and inequality: An evidence review for the
Department for Transport, NatCen, 2019)
Mitigations / • An analysis of the data does not suggest that older people are
comments: disproportionally affected by the proposal.
• The analysis of ward age profiles in section 2.1 identified that wards
impacted by this proposal did not disproportionality contain more older
people than the city average.
• Older people generally have more limited car access and lower car use
than adults aged 30-69 (access to transport and life opportunities,
NatCen, 2, QoL, 2023)
• QoL 2023 data suggests a significantly lower proportion of older people
feel that ‘a lack of transport options prevents them from leaving their
homes when they want to’
• The same dataset suggests a significantly higher proportion of older
people state that they are in ‘poor health’ and are ‘inactive’ which may
limit their transport options in ways that could make them both more
and less reliant on driving.
Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: • One in five Disabled adults faces extra costs of over £1,000 a month even
after they have received welfare payments designed to meet those
costs1.
• Disability increases with age: 4.1% of all children, for the working age
population it increases to 12.3% and for people aged 65 and over it
increases to 55.9%.
• In broad terms people with health-related mobility impairments have
more limited car access and lower car use than those without mobility
• Some Disabled people may be more reliant on use of a private motor
vehicle because of their impairment(s)
• Some households have multiple motor vehicles to meet the accessibility
requirements of a Disabled person
• Undertaking an analysis of current transport trends among Disabled
people it is important to note that Disabled people are not a
homogenous group, their needs and abilities can vary greatly depending
on the nature and severity of their impairments, (access to transport and
life opportunities, NatCen, 2019)
Mitigations / • The analysis of ward data in 2.1 shows that all but one of the wards
comments: (Lockleaze) are either in line with the city average or significantly lower
than the city average when it comes to households with at least one
Disabled person.
• Disabled people who require access to a car can apply for Blue Badge
permits. Blue Badge holders do not require a permit to park in the RPS

1
Disability Price Tag | Disability charity Scope UK Page 79
which would suggest the impact of this proposal will be limited and
therefore unlikely to be disproportionate.
• It is a legal requirement under the Equalities Act to ensure information
provided (including about any proposed changes to fees) is accessible to
Disabled service users.
Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: • The analysis of ward age profiles in section 2.1 identified that wards
impacted by this proposal did not disproportionality contain more males
or females respectively.
• Car access is statistically higher among men than women but both
groups use cars as frequently as the other. (access to transport and life
opportunities, NatCen, 2019). Women are more likely to use the bus and
walk to work and men more likely to cycle (QoL 2023).
• The QoL 2023 survey suggest that there is only a marginal difference
between males and females ‘who find it difficult to manage financially’
(8.5% 8.6%)
• Women are statistically more likely to hold caring responsibilities for
children and older adults.
Mitigations / • While caring duties may be a factor in households owning one or
comments: multiple cars we do not have evidence to indicate that the financial
burden of car ownership sits disproportionality with males or females.
• The QoL 2023 survey suggests that two-parent families are close to the
city average for the percentage ‘who find it difficult to manage
financially.’ (9.6% vs 8.7% ave.)
Sexual orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: No data to suggest a disproportionate impact
Mitigations /
comments:
Pregnancy / Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Maternity
Potential impacts: No data to suggest a disproportionate impact. People who are pregnant or who
have young children may be more reliant on private motor vehicles.
Mitigations / See general comments above
comments:
Gender reassignment Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: No data to suggest a disproportionate impact
Mitigations:
Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic households in the UK are more likely
to be in deep poverty and experience higher levels of material
deprivation.
• Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic households are more likely to be
living in overcrowded housing and intergenerational households.
Bangladeshi and Pakistani groups are more likely to live in multi-family
households.
• Black people in the UK are less likely to hold a driving licence and more
likely to rely on public transport.
• Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic groups in Bristol are more likely to
find inaccessible public transport prevents them from leaving their home
when they want to
Page 80
• People who do not speak English as a main language may
require information in plain English and community language
translations or videos etc.
Mitigations / • The analysis of ward ethnicity profiles in section 2.1 identified the
comments: majority (9 out of 13) affected by the proposal are broadly in line with
the city average. Ashley, Central, Lawrence Hill and Lockleaze have
significantly lower proportions of people from a White background and
higher representation among Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic groups.
• Cross referencing ethnicity data with car ownership data shows a
correlation between wards with higher populations of Black, Asian and
Minoritised ethnic groups and lower car ownership. In particular Central
ward and Lawrence Hill ward has significantly lower car ownership
overall and a much lower proportion of households with 2 or more
cars/vans. Lockleaze was the exception where car use was more in line
with the city average
• National data shows us that people from a Black, Asian or minoritised
ethnic background are less likely to have access to a private vehicle, be
more reliant on public transport to access employment (access to
transport and life opportunities, NatCen, 2019).
• People from a Black, Asian or minoritised ethnic background are much
more likely to state they ‘find it difficult to manage financially’.
• More data is required understand the link between car ownership and
ethnicity, but the current analysis does not suggest there could be a
disproportionate impact on people from a Black, Asian and minoritised
background due to their ability to meet increased costs
Religion or Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Belief
Potential impacts: No data to suggest a disproportionate impact
Mitigations /
comments:
Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
civil partnership
Potential impacts: No data to suggest a disproportionate impact
Mitigations /
comments:
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS
Socio-Economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: • The analysis of deprivation data in section 2.1 shows a mixed picture
across the wards affected by this proposal. Wards such as Ashley,
Brislington West, Central, Lawrence Hill and Lockleaze contain areas
among the top 10% most deprived in the country. Conversely wards such
as Clifton, Clifton Down, Redland and Southville contain some of the top
10 and 20% least deprived areas in the country.
• Almost all the wards contain a diverse range of more and less deprived
areas.
Mitigations / • Of those wards with overall higher levels of deprivation there is a general
comments: trend that overall car ownership is lower. For instance, most of Lawrence
Hill is in the top 10 most deprived areas of the country but contains
much lower levels of car ownership than the city average.

Page 81
• National data suggests people with personal incomes in the lowest
quintile have considerably more limited car access but only slightly lower
car use than people with higher incomes and make greater use of buses
but less use of trains. Their frequency of bicycle use is similar to those
with higher incomes (Access to transport and life opportunities, NatCen,
2019 )
• People in the top 10% most deprived areas are much more like to state
that they find it ‘difficult to manage financially’ which would suggest that
these proposals will place a greater financial burden on this group. That
said many in thisgroup would not be able to afford to purchase and
operate a vehicle (Transport and inequality: An evidence review for the
Department for Transport, NatCen, 2019).

Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: People who are dependent on motor vehicles to provide care for others may be
disproportionately impacted by additional costs. About 4 in 9 (45.3%) say caring
responsibilities prevent them from leaving their home when they want to and almost 1
in 7 (14.3%) are prevented from getting involved in their community due to accessibility
issues.

3.2 Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their protected or other
relevant characteristics?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our Public Sector Equality Duty to:
✓ Eliminate unlawful discrimination for a protected group
✓ Advance equality of opportunity between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t
✓ Foster good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t

Access to a vehicle can be important for many people and critical for others depending on their personal
circumstances. Balanced against this is the need for the city to reduce car dependency overall to ensure
we meet our goals around climate change, air quality and public health.

How people move around the city is intrinsically linked to equality and inclusion. We know that many
groups with protected characteristics are more likely to suffer the negative impacts of car use – such as
congestion, poor air quality, traffic accidents and unhealthy physical environments, whilst at the same
time having more limited access and use of vehicles. In addition, we know that these groups are much
more reliant on walking and public transport as a means of accessing work, education, training, and
services. (Transport and inequality: An evidence review for the Department for Transport, NatCen,
2019).

This proposal is in line with the Bristol Transport Strategy that seeks to rebalance the transport system
to ensure that car use is priced fairly compared with walking, cycling and public transport. Cars take up a
disproportionate amount of space on public highway which limits the use of that space for more
investment in sustainable modes of transport (e.g. bike and bus lanes and wider pavements). By
increasing the tariffs associated car ownership we may be able to encourage people to re-evaluate the
need to own a vehicle.

Page 82
(60 people using a bus, cycling or in cars, showing the disproportionate amount of physical space cars
take up for the amount of people they carry)

Step 4: Impact

4.1 How has the equality impact assessment informed or changed the proposal?
What are the main conclusions of this assessment? Use this section to provide an overview of your findings. This
summary can be included in decision pathway reports etc.
If you have identified any significant negative impacts which cannot be mitigated, provide a justification showing
how the proposal is proportionate, necessary, and appropriate despite this.
Summary of significant negative impacts and how they can be mitigated or justified:
We have identified some potential negative impacts from the proposal relating to ethnicity, deprivation and
caring roles. The analysis suggests that people living in more deprived areas of the city as well as e.g. Disabled
people those from minoritised ethnic backgrounds are more to experience financial hardship because of existing
structural inequality. This proposal will impact individuals within these groups who may find it more difficult to
meet these additional costs. The main mitigation for this is that analysis also indicated that car ownership tends to
be lower among these groups. In future more data should be collected to better understand the link between car
ownership and ability to pay.
Summary of positive impacts / opportunities to promote the Public Sector Equality Duty:
How people move around the city is intrinsically linked to equality and inclusion. We know that several protected
characteristic groups are more likely to suffer the negative impacts of car use – such as congestion, poor air
quality, traffic accidents and unhealthy physical environments, whilst at the same time having more limited access
and use of vehicles. In addition, we know that these groups are much more reliant on walking and public transport
as a means of accessing work, education, training, and services. (Transport and inequality: An evidence review for
the Department for Transport, NatCen, 2019). Rebalancing the transport network to better promote sustainable
transport and account for the negative externalities of car use will benefit everyone.

4.2 Action Plan
Use this section to set out any actions you have identified to improve data, mitigate issues, or maximise
opportunities etc. If an action is to meet the needs of a particular protected group please specify this.
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale
Seek comments and feedback on proposals at Committee Jacob Pryor September 2024
Page 83
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale
Amend scheme in line with feedback from Committee Jacob Pryor September 2024

4.3 How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
How will you know if you have been successful? Once the activity has been implemented this equality impact
assessment should be periodically reviewed to make sure your changes have been effective your approach is still
appropriate.
The council’s Highways and Traffic Team will continue to monitor trends and impacts with regards to these new
policy changes

Step 5: Review
The Equality and Inclusion Team need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your EqIA. EqIAs
should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers on the equalities
impact of the proposal. Please seek feedback and review from the Equality and Inclusion Team before requesting
sign off from your Director2.
Equality and Inclusion Team Review: Director Sign-Off:
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

Date: 15/08/2024 Date: 16/08/2024

2
Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
Page 84
Environmental Impact Assessment [version 1.0]
Proposal title: Promote sustainable transport through parking policy
Project stage and type: ☐ Initial Idea Mandate ☐ Outline Business Case ☒ Full Business Case
☐ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☒ Service ☐ New ☒ Changing
☐ Other [please state] ☐ Already exists / review
Directorate: Management of Place Lead Officer name: Sarah Clark
Service Area: Traffic & Highways Lead Officer role: Parking Manager

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of this Environmental Impact Assessment is to help you develop your proposal in a way that is
compliant with the council’s policies and supports the council’s strategic objectives under the One City Climate
Strategy, the One City Ecological Emergency Strategy and the latest Corporate Strategy.
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the project proposal process by someone with a good
knowledge of the project, the service area that will deliver it, and sufficient influence over the proposal to make
changes as needed.
It is good practice to take a team approach to completing the Environmental Impact Assessment. See further
guidance on completing this document. Please email environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk early for advice
and feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Please use plain English, avoiding jargon and
acronyms.
The proposal seeks to make 8 changes to the existing Resident Parking Schemes as follows:
- Increasing the cost of the 1st permit from £56/annum to up to £178/annum and introducing an
inflationary increase every year thereafter to be agreed by Full Council.

- Realignment of the pricing of the St Phillips and Easton Resident Parking Schemes with other
Resident Parking Schemes.

- Apply a 22% inflationary increase to business, customer, medical and trader permits.

- Increase the cost of visitor permits so that they cost the same as the hourly Pay and Display rate,
and reduce the overall number available. (Noting that this does not apply to Essential Visitor
Permits given to residents with care needs).

- Increase Pay and Display fees from £1.50/hour to £2/hour.

- Increase Clifton Village, Clifton East & Kingsdown RPS Pay and Display fees from £1.50/hour to
£2.50/hour to manage demand in these areas.

- Removal of 30 minutes free parking in Pay and Display bays

And the following:
Page 85
Discounted Parking Tariff at Temple Gate & West End Car Parks. As both these Car Parks are on the outskirts of
the City Centre, an early bird offer at these underutilised locations could encourage customers to park on the
outskirts of the city and complete their journeys on foot. West End has the additional advantage for customers of
being outside the Clean Air Zone.

Linear Parking Charges. We believe there could be benefits in reviewing the overall tariff structure to simplify and
improve the customer experience. A linear structure where the same hourly rate applies all day would still
encourage turnover, support the retail and leisure economy whilst continuing to deter long stay parking as longer
stays would be more expensive

1.2 Will the proposal have an environmental impact?
Could the proposal have either a positive or negative effects for the environment now or in the future? If ‘No’
explain why you are sure there will be no environmental impact, then skip steps 2-3 and request review by sending
this form to environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk

If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment.
☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

1.3 If the proposal is part of an options appraisal, has the environmental impact of each option
been assessed and included in the recommendation-making process?
If ‘Yes’ please ensure that the details of the environmental impacts of each option are made clear in the pros and
cons section of the project management options appraisal document.

☒ Yes ☐ No ☐ Not applicable [please select]

If ‘No’ explain why environmental impacts have not been considered as part of the options appraisal process.
There may be a reduction in emissions encouraging a shift to more sustainable modes of
transport as an impact of the proposals. However, drivers seeking to avoid paying for parking
may drive further in search of alternative parking, increasing their emissions slightly. Keeping
parking charges within the limits of what car park users would consider affordable and
reasonable for that area and the length of time parked there would minimise this behaviour, but
may also reduce the perceived benefits of modal shift.

Step 2: What kinds of environmental impacts might the project have?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying
potential impacts.

Page 86
Does the proposal create any benefits for the environment, or have any adverse impacts?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our corporate environmental objectives and the wider One City Climate and Ecological Emergency
strategies.
Consider how the proposal creates environmental impacts in the following categories, both now and in the future.
Reasonable efforts should be made to quantify stated benefit or adverse impacts wherever possible.

Where the proposal is likely to have a beneficial impact, consider what actions would enhance those impacts. Where
the proposal is likely to have a harmful impact, consider whether actions would mitigate these impacts.

Enhancements or mitigation actions are only required when there is a likely impact identified. Remember that where
enhancements or mitigation actions are listed, they should be assigned to staff and appropriately resourced.

GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many categories)

There may be a reduction in emissions encouraging a shift to more
ENV1 Carbon neutral: sustainable modes of transport as an impact of the proposals.
Emissions of climate The proposal will help to prioritise more road space for sustainable
changing gases modes through infrastructure like cycle hangars.
Benefits
BCC has committed to
achieving net zero emissions
for its direct activities by
2025, and to support the city
Increase BCC’s ability to support additional sustainable transport
in achieving net zero by
measures in future through reallocation of road space
2030.
Enhancing
Will the proposal involve actions
transport, or the use of
energy in buildings? Will the
proposal involve the
purchase of goods or
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
services? If the answer is yes
Drivers seeking to avoid paying for parking may drive further in search
to either of these questions,
of alternative parking, increasing their emissions slightly
there will be a carbon
impact. Adverse
impacts
Consider the scale and
timeframe of the impact,
particularly if the proposal Keeping parking charges within the limits of what car park
will lead to ongoing users would consider affordable and reasonable for that
emissions beyond the 2025 area and the length of time parked there would minimise
Mitigating
and 2030 target dates. actions this behaviour, but may also reduce the perceived benefits
of modal shift.
Further guidance
☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years

Page 87
ENV2 Ecological recovery: Increasing the amount of available road space for reallocation to
Wildlife and habitats sustainable transport and ecological recovery actions, such as
BCC has committed to 30% additional street trees, increases possibilities for these actions in
Benefits
of its land being managed future.
for nature and to halve its
use of pesticides by 2030.

Consider how your proposal
can support increased space Enhancing
for nature, reduced use of actions
pesticides, reduce pollution
to waterways, and reduce
consumption of products Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
that undermine ecosystems
around the world.
Adverse
If your proposal will directly impacts
lead to a reduction in habitat
within Bristol, then consider
how your proposed
mitigation can lead to a
biodiversity net gain. Be sure
to refer to quantifiable Mitigating
changes wherever possible. actions

Further guidance
☐ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

ENV3 A cleaner, low-waste
city: Consumption of Benefits
resources and generation of
waste

Consider what resources will Enhancing
actions
be used as a result of the
proposal, how they can be
minimised or swapped for
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
less impactful ones, where
they will be sourced from,
and what will happen to any
waste generated Adverse
impacts

Mitigating
actions
Further guidance

☐ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Page 88
Both through encouraging sustainable transport use and through
enabling future reallocation of road space to climate resilience
ENV4 Climate resilience:
measures like street trees and SUDS features.
Bristol’s resilience to the Benefits
effects of climate change

Bristol’s climate is already
changing, and increasingly
frequent instances of
extreme weather will Enhancing
become more likely over actions
time.

Consider how the proposal
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
will perform during periods
of extreme weather
(particularly heat and
Adverse
flooding).
impacts

Consider if the proposal will
reduce or increase risk to
people and assets during
extreme weather events.
Mitigating
actions
Further guidance
☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Supporting modal shift will lead to reduced air pollution across the
city region.
Statutory duty: Benefits
Prevention of Pollution to
air, water, or land

Enhancing
actions
Consider how the proposal
will change the likelihood of
pollution occurring to air, Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
water, or land and what
steps will be taken to Adverse
prevent pollution occurring. impacts

Mitigating
Further guidance actions

☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Step 3: Action Plan
Use this section summarise and assign responsibility for any actions you have identified to improve data, enhance
beneficial, or mitigate negative impacts. Actions identified in section two can be grouped together if named
responsibility is under the same person.
Page 89
This action plan should be updated at each stage of the project. Please be aware that the Sustainable City and
Climate Change Service may use this action plan as an audit checklist during the project’s implementation or
operation.
Enhancing / mitigating action required Responsible Officer Timescale

Step 4: Review
The Sustainable City and Climate Change Service need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your
impact assessment. Assessments should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for
decision-makers on the environmental impact of the proposal.
Please seek feedback and review by emailing environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk before final submission of
your decision pathway documentation1.
Where impacts identified in this assessment are deemed significant, they will be summarised here by the Sustainable
City and Climate Change Service and must be included in the ‘evidence base’ section of the decision pathway cover
sheet.

Summary of significant beneficial impacts and opportunities to support the Climate, Ecological and Corporate
Strategies (ENV1,2,3,4):

Summary of significant adverse impacts and how they can be mitigated:

Environmental Performance Team Reviewer: Submitting author:
Nicola Hares – Environmental Performance Officer Dominic Hitchcock – Infrastructure Manager

Date: Date: 19/8/24
19/08/2024

1
Review by the Sustainable City and Climate Change Service confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers
Page
to consider the likely environmental impacts at this stage. 90not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
This is
Agenda Item 8

Non-key Decision Committee Report

PURPOSE: Non-key decision update report

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 12 September 2024

TITLE: Supported Bus Services Priorities Task and Finish Group
Officer presenting the report: Adam Crowther Job title: Head of City Transport

Committee Chair: Cllr Ed Plowden
Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Purpose of Report:

To establish a member Task and Finish Group for Supported Bus Services, and associated Terms of
Reference (ToR).
Evidence Base / Context

1. The commercial bus network is complemented by additional ‘supported’ bus services, procured and
managed by the West of England Combined Authority (CA). These are funded through a levy of its
constituent Councils.
2. One of the impacts of the Covid pandemic was a contraction of the bus network, including the cessation
of several services, both commercial and supported. Passenger numbers are continuing to grow back to
pre-pandemic numbers and developing a comprehensive bus network remains an essential part of our
transport strategy.
3. In its budget setting for 2024/25 onwards, Bristol City Council agreed to allocate income generated
from the Clean Air Zone for the purpose of supporting more bus services. This amounts to circa £4.7m
of funding over 4 years commencing April 2024. This funding is in addition to the current budgeted
allocation for supported services in the Levy of £1.32m per annum. No funding is expected to be spent
in 2024/25.
4. The Task and Finish group will review the bus network, utilising existing data and information from the
Combined Authority’s AssessWest project, the adopted West of England Bus Strategy and the region’s
Bus Services Improvement Plan, to prioritise additional or enhanced bus services that would contribute
to the aspiration in these documents and improved accessibility for residents in the city. The Combined
Authority will undertake the procurement exercise working with BCC colleagues to procure these
services, with an intended start date of April 2025. The intention would be to fund these services for a
minimum 3-year period, to give an opportunity for these services to develop over this time and remove
or reduce any ongoing financial liability.
5. To enable procurement and registration of bus services in time for the intended start in April 2025,
agreement on services to tender will need to be reached by the start of November 2024 and then
approval of the contracts to be awarded will be required by the middle of December 2024.
6. A wider variety of service option can be proposed initially and sent to tender with a decision made
1
Version January 2024 Page 91
when the tenders are returned on which ones to fund.
7. A committee decision paper will be brought forward for December committee to seek agreement to
spend the funding and a delegation to appropriate decision makers will be required to decide what the
funds are spent on when the tenders are returned. It is not possible in the timeframes available to
agree the services to be funded after the tender return dates at a formal committee and meet the
deadline for registering a service for April start.
8. Terms of Reference for the Task and Finish Group are appended to this report. Input is required as to
the frequency and duration of meetings to inform the ToR.

Officer Recommendations:

1. That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity notes the report and further details supplied in
Appendix A and approves the recommended approach and Terms of Reference for the Supported
Bus Services Task and Finish Group.

2. That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity agree the appropriate decision makers for the
delegated decision on which services to fund when tenders are returned so that this can be included
in the committee decision paper.
3. That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity agree the frequency and duration of meetings
to inform the ToR

Corporate Strategy alignment:

The development of a high quality bus network delivers benefits across all Corporate Strategy themes:
1. Children and Young People: It increases independence particularly in the young, as well as
maintaining social inclusion for all and especially older people.
2. Economy and Skills: Improve economic and social equality, pursuing economic growth which
includes everyone and making sure people have good access to good quality learning, decent jobs
and homes they can afford.
3. Transport and Connectivity: Buses are a key mode for disadvantaged groups and therefore an
improved bus network assists lower income groups with accessing the jobs market.
4. Transport and Connectivity: The Bus Strategy also proposes more links into deprived areas to link to
key arterial routes.
5. Transport and Connectivity: make Bristol a joined-up city, linking up people with jobs and with each
other.
6. Health, Care and Wellbeing: Help to tackle poverty by improving access to transport and
employment.
7. Economy & Skills: Improved accessibility and better public transport will assist with enabling
development and economic growth.
8. Environment and Sustainability: Better public transport will support the decarbonisation of the city.

City Benefits:

1. Improving the physical accessibility of public transport modes, and wider connectivity to jobs,
education, and other opportunities across the city for all citizens.
2. Promoting the use of more sustainable travel including bus, walking, and cycling as preferential
modes. Subsequently delivering better air quality by reducing the reliance on private vehicles, and
improving the health and wellbeing of the population, and especially for those living with a pre-

2
Version January 2024 Page 92
existing health condition

Consultation Details:

1. The proposal will be developed with the Combined Authority, as transport authority with
responsibility for bus operations.
Background Documents: None

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background information and detail YES
Supported Bus Services Priorities Task and Finish group TOR.

3
Version January 2024 Page 93
Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee
Task and Finish
NAME OF GROUP: Supported Bus Services Priorities Task and Finish Group

1. Purpose of group

Purpose of group To review the bus network and to prioritise additional or enhanced bus services in line with the
Corporate Strategy
Introduction i. There is a need to invest in supporting bus services, and there is a budget to do so from
CAZ. Although the long-term quantum of this budget is unclear, other proposals such as
the WPL may provide longer term funding.
ii. It will be important to establish principles for prioritising investment as the need will
inevitably outstrip the budget.
iii. The WECA mayor recently held a citizen’s assembly on this topic which may provide some
useful inputs.
iv. This work needs to proceed at pace to be able to then allocate the budget, procure the
services and fulfil the need to register services 70 days in advance of the agreed windows
(September and April)
v. A decision will be needed as to whether to provide this funding with prioritised proposals
for WECA to then determine how best to fund it or whether to specify which services are
to be funded in priority order.
vi. There are likely to be pressures emerging on the overall WECA Levy budget over the
coming years which may put further pressure on existing supported bus service budgets. A
view will need to be taken as to how to manage this.

Scope Any TFG will need to be carefully scoped. As there is a pressing need to agree priorities for
Supporting Bus Services the following may be a useful initial list if this is agreed as a TFG but is
not exhaustive.

a. Current methods for prioritisation – Bristol and WECA (especially considering
the recent WECA Citizens assembly on this subject)
b. Current state of play – currently supported services, recently lost services,
Westlink/WESTlocal, Community Transport provision. Up to date performance
information will be useful.
c. The social/economic/geographic/equalities drivers.
d. Investment approaches that need to be considered – optimising current
routes, reinstating lost routes or pump priming new ones; how to support the
roll out of Liveable Neighbourhoods.
e. Inputs from other parties, such as WECA and any advice from operators as to
how their insights may support the process.
f. Budget options – current budgets are limited especially in time; do we want
more services or longer contracts?
g. A timetable considering the need to invest the budget asap.

Page 94
2. Member involvement

Chair of the Councillor Tim Rippington
Working Group
Members of the The Whips have been asked for membership; however it is hoped that the Members of the
Working Group Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee will be invited to be members of the Task & Finish
sessions.
3. Officer support

Lead Directorate Alex Hearn, Director: Economy of Place
Officer(s) Adam Crowther, Head of City Transport
Pete Woodhouse, Transport Strategy Manager
Helen Wigginton, Transport Delivery Manager
Policy Committee Sam Wilcock, Policy Committee Officer
team lead officer
List of possible WECA
internal and First Bus & other providers
external Local Councillors
contributors BCC Transport team
4. Timing / meeting arrangements

How long is the The latest date a decision can be taken to register a service is the 20th January 2025. However,
group’s work to ensure registration in time and appropriate time for tenders to be agreed and awarded
expected to take? working with the Combined Authority, it is recommended that a decision be reached in
principle before the Christmas period.

Timeline
• Committee to approve TFG 12th September 2024
• Proposals for tendering to be agreed by 31st October 2024
• Committee to approve spending the allocated funding and delegation for determining
which proposals to fund December 5th 2024
• Agreement on which services to support by 20th December 2024 – tender return date
TBC
• Services registered no later than 20th January 2025
• Services begin April 2025
Meeting format Informal group sessions will take place in private and will be held either remotely or in person
at City Hall. It is proposed that there will be a minimum of 6 session sessions lasting up to 1.5
hours each.
Any formal group sessions to be held in person at City Hall.
Ways of working Members will work collaboratively, to constructively examine available evidence.
The group will seek to achieve consensus in developing any views/potential recommendations
for further action.
5. Conclusions/recommendations
Decision-making/pathway for recommendations

Page 95
Agenda Item 9

Committee Report

PURPOSE: Final Decision Report

KEY OR NON-KEY DECISION: Key decision over £500k

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 12 September 2024

TITLE: Bristol Regional Cycling Hub, Lawrence Weston
Ward(s): Avonmouth and Lawrence Weston.

Officer presenting the report: Adam Crowther Job title: Head of City Transport

Committee Chair: Cllr Ed Plowden
Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: BCC Staff

Purpose of Report:

To apprise the Committee of the proposed Bristol Regional Cycling Hub (BRCH) in Lawrence Weston and seek
its approval for expenditure to develop the business case and submit a full planning application. To ensure
efficient and effective delivery of this project before the City Region Sustainable Transport Settlement
(CRSTS) spending deadline of March 2027, funding needs to be allocated and approved in a timely manner.

Strategic Context
1. The Bristol Family Cycling Centre, which has been in existence since 2010, is currently operating from
a temporary location at the Old Whitchurch Athletics Track in Bamfield. The proposed BRCH will
replace the existing cycling centre in Bamfield. The BRCH is a strategic and transformative initiative
by Bristol City Council (BCC) to create a regional inclusive cycling infrastructure at a permanent site
within the Henacre Open Space in Lawrence Weston, northwest Bristol.

2. The new facility in Lawrence Weston will expand current operational capabilities at the temporary
cycling centre by providing cycle training to people of all ages and abilities, socioeconomic
backgrounds, and across a much wider geographic area. The proposed facility will build on current
provision of specialist cycles for people with all abilities. The flagship centre will help boost levels of
cycling and physical activity in Bristol and across the region by delivering leisure activities alongside
an extensive programme of sporting activities and new pathways into cycling.

3. Delivery of the BRCH is contingent on developing a business case and securing full planning
permission. In this regard, a full planning application will be submitted for determination by BCC - as
a Regulation 3 Planning Application to ensure planning certainty. A Regulation 3 Planning Application
is a type of full planning permission application that is typically required for a major proposal that is
1
Version January 2024 Page 96
being promoted or developed by a local authority. The proposed BRCH is a major strategic project,
and due consideration will be given to determining the planning application in a timely and objective
manner to mitigate associated delivery risks.

Evidence Base / Options to consider:

4. The alternative to building a new permanent facility (BRCH) in Lawrence Weston is the discontinuation
of cycling centre operations/services because the temporary location at the Old Whitchurch Athletics
Track in Bamfield is earmarked for housing development within the next three years. This option will
result in the loss of benefits and legacy impacts that have been realised over the past 10 years albeit
from the modest but viable temporary facility in Bamfield.

5. Current project budget of £300k was incrementally approved via delegated authority and Officer
Executive Decision (OED), and this is being funded from CRSTS Integrated Transport Block allocations.
This funding has enabled initiation and diligent planning of the project over the past 12 months, with
formal kick off in April/May 2024.

6. A Feasibility and Development Funding Application was submitted to the West of England Combined
Authority (WECA) on 29 April 2024 for initial investment funding of £813k to cover project
development costs (Outline Business Case and submission of Full Planning Application) in FY 24/25
and part of FY 25/26. This funding request was approved by the West of England Directors of
Infrastructure on 27 June 2024, and this will enable completion of the Outline Business Case in
September/October 2024 and submission of the full planning application in April 2025 (including an
Environmental Impact Assessment).

7. The current budget allocation of £300k will be replaced with the recently approved £813k from CRSTS
investment funding after the Grant Offer Letter is issued by WECA and sealed. Additional funding will
be required to develop the Full Business Case and Detailed Designs in FY 25/26, and a funding
request/change request will be submitted to WECA before the end of FY 24/25.

8. From the recent unsuccessful bid for Levelling Up Fund (LUF), the estimated capital cost for the BRCH
is £15m including contingency. A decision on reallocation of CRSTS overprogramming fund to deliver
this project is expected before the end of 2024, with early indication of a positive outcome for this
project.

Officer Recommendations:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:

1. Approve the proposed approach in relation to delivery of the Bristol Regional Cycling Hub (BRCH) as
outlined in this report. The proposed approach will require the Committee to be updated upon
completion of the Outline Business Case, but the Full Business Case will require Committee
approval.

2. Authorise the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of the
Transport and Connectivity Committee, to take all steps required to proceed with the development

2
Version January 2024 Page 97
of the Outline Business Case and Full Business Case, and submission of the planning application.

3. Authorise the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of the
Transport and Connectivity Committee, to take all steps required to bid for, accept, and spend
CRSTS funding (inclusive of the recently awarded funding of £813k) for procuring and awarding
contracts for development and delivery of the project, which may be over the key decision
threshold.

4. The above recommendations will apply to other funding opportunities that may arise during the
project’s life cycle, but the Committee will be updated on any such funding opportunity.

Corporate Strategy alignment:

The BRCH underlines the importance of cycling as a key component of BCC’s sustainable transport,
urban development, public health, and socioeconomic policy goals. The facility aims to increase
cycling participation, foster an inclusive environment, and in so doing reinforce the crucial role of
Bristol Bikeability in achieving these aims.

1. Infrastructure is only beneficial if people use it as intended. The BRCH will complement investments
in cycle infrastructure and liveable neighbourhood projects by providing people of all abilities with
cycling skills and confidence; in alignment with Bristol One City Plan.

2. The BRCH will be built on a former landfill site at Lawrence Weston in northwest Bristol, which is one
of the most deprived areas of the city. It will deliver an inclusive cycling community, offering
programmes for skills improvement, social prescribing, and physical rehabilitation. It will also act as a
hub for delivering targeted active travel and health programmes as well as local community
programmes, creating additional employment, training, and local inclusion benefits for all
demographic groups.

3. The BRCH will promote training and learning opportunities, host competition events, deliver classes
for disabled training, and serve as the focal point of Bristol’s travel behaviour change programme.

Benefits:

1. Regional cycling hub and sports facility to address current deficit within and beyond Bristol
2. Complement other investments in cycle infrastructure and transport connectivity
3. Increased cycling participation within Bristol and across the West of England region
4. Decarbonisation through modal shift
5. Cycling as a safe, viable and sustainable transport mode
6. Road safety training for scooters, cargo bikes and cycles
7. Improved physical, emotional and mental wellbeing through social prescribing
8. Support social/health interventions such as weight loss programmes
9. Inclusive environment and support community cohesion
10. Job retention from existing cycling centre and new employment opportunities
11. Skills acquisition/training, work experience and volunteering opportunities for the wider community
12. Collaboration with organisations such as LifeCycle & Bristol Bike Project

3
Version January 2024 Page 98
Consultation Details:

1. Over the past three years (as part of previous funding bids), there have been extensive
engagements and consultations with local and regional stakeholders. There are several letters of
support from stakeholders dating back to 2021.

2. There is considerable support from the local community and partner organisations such as Ambition
Lawrence Weston, British Cycling, Bikeability Trust, Bristol Bike Project, Bristol Cycling Campaign,
Bristol Sport Foundation, LifeCycle, Bristol Autism Project, Sustrans and WECA.

3. The project is supported by local ward councillors, and the MP for Bristol North West(Darren Jones)
is a strong advocate of this project and supported previous LUF bid.

4. The proposal has been endorsed and supported by Bristol City Council’s senior management and
executive leadership teams and recently received endorsement and approval for CRSTS investment
funding from the West of England Directors of Infrastructure.

5. Further stakeholder engagements and consultations will be carried out over the next 12 months as
part of the ongoing project development activities.

Background Documents:
West of England Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036, Section 8: Local Connectivity - Joint Local
Transport Plan 4 2020-2036 (westofengland-ca.gov.uk)

Revenue Cost £ TBC Source of Revenue P15359-1002 Bristol Cycle Centre
Funding Relocation
Capital Cost £15m Source of Capital Funding City Region Sustainable Transport
Settlement
One off cost ☐ Ongoing cost ☐ Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving? Choose an
item.
OR Income generation proposal ☐

Professional comments section:
1. Finance Advice: The report seeks members’ approval for the submission of the outline business case
(OBC) for the proposed Bristol Regional Cycling Hub (BRCH) in Lawrence Weston. It also seeks approval for
the expenditure to fund the development of the business case. The cost of developing the business has
been calculated at £0.813m. These estimates have been based on a combination of fixed price quotes from
external consultants as well as costings for internally provided services based on known rates already
charged to the project. It also includes a reasonable allowance for contingency reflecting the carefully
assessed risks that exist in the delivery of the OBC. This project is being put forward to the Combined
Authority as a possible solution to the City Regional Sustainable Transport Scheme underspending.
Finance Business Partner: Ben Hegarty, Finance Business Partner Growth and Regeneration, 19 July 2024

2. Legal Advice: Under the Transport Act 2000 the Council as part of WECA has a duty to develop policies for
4
Version January 2024 Page 99
the promotion and encouragement of safe integrated efficient and economic transport and setting up the
cycling centre will be part of these requirements and in accordance with the Joint Local Transport Plan 4.
Under Section 1 of the Localism Act 2011, the Council has the power to enter into the arrangements set out
in this report under the general power of competence.

The submission of bids for funding does not raise any specific legal implications. The procurement process
must be conducted in line with the 2015 Procurement Regulations/Procurement Act 2023 and the Councils
own procurement rules. Legal services will advise and assist officers with regard to the conduct of the
procurement process and the resulting contractual arrangements.

Legal Team Leader: Husinara Jones and Joanne Mansfield, Team Manager/Solicitor, 8 August 2024

3. Implications on IT: I can see no implications on IT regarding this activity.
IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson, Lead Enterprise Architect, 15 July 2024

4. HR Advice: Having read the report, I can confirm that no HR implications are presented by these
proposals.
HR Partner: Chris Hather, HR Consultancy Manager, 15 July 2024

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal YES

5
Version January 2024 Page 100
Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (Environmental Impact Assessment YES

Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment NO

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external YES

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

6
Version January 2024 Page 101
Investment Fund - Feasibility and Development Funding
Application Form

1. SCHEME:

Bristol Cycling Hub

2. Lead Organisation

Bristol City Council

3. Partner organisations

4. Scheme contact details

Name: Alex Adeeko

5. Scheme Type – mark with an X

Transport X

Non-Transport Housing Enabling
Business Support
Skills

Other (please specify):

6. Is this investment linked to any others within the early investment or wider
Investment Fund programme? If so, please set out the relationship and linkages.

Details:
1

Page 102
The proposed Bristol Cycling Hub (BCH) Project is a strategic and transformative initiative
by Bristol City Council (BCC) to create a regional inclusive cycling infrastructure at the
Henacre Open Space in Lawrence Weston, between Henbury and Shirehampton in
northwest Bristol. The project is intended to cater for cyclists of all ages and all levels and
will include a competition-grade track (or velodrome) allowing high speeds and safe racing
conditions. Competition grade tracks such as that proposed for the BCH are used for events
and are built to accommodate local and international championship competitions.
The proposed BCH underlines the importance of cycling as a key component of BCC’s
sustainable transport, urban development, public health, and socioeconomic policy goals.
It is dedicated to increasing cycling participation, nurturing an inclusive environment, and
reinforcing the crucial role of Bristol Bikeability in realising these goals.
This investment will complement and serve as a key enabler to all investments (current
and future) in sustainable transport and active travel proposals, particularly cycle
infrastructure schemes and liveable neighbourhoods.

7. Total Funding required for this phase of works

a. Spending Profile (£)

2

Page 103
Description 23/24 24/25 25/26 26/27 Total

Project Initiation & Startup £17,241.36 £5,000 - - £22,241.36
(BCC Officers’ Cost) (Actuals)

Ground Investigations £14,981.45 - £14,981.45
(Third Party/Consultants’ Cost) (Actuals)

£1,525.00 £1,525.00
Pre-Application Fee (Actuals)

- £100,000 £20,000 £120,000.00
Outline Business Case & Full
Planning Application
(BCC Officers’ Cost)
- £520,000 £10,000 £530,000.000
Outline Business Case & Full (Agreed Fee (Agreed Fee
Planning Application Proposal) Proposal)
(Third Party/Consultants’ Cost)
£50,000 £50,000.00
Stakeholder Engagement and
Communications
£75,000 £75,000.00
Contingency

b. Cost Breakdown (£)

3

Page 104
Investment Fund (£) Match Funding (£)

£142,241.36,
In house staff costs (Actual Spend
& Estimates)
£1,525.00
Pre-Application Fee (Actual
Spend)
£544,981.45
Third Party Support (Actual
Spend & Fee Proposal)
£50,000
Other (Stakeholder Engagement
and Communications)
£75,000
Other (Contingency)

£813,747.81
Total

8. Please describe the scheme to be developed (including its objectives and expected
impacts) and the proposed activity to be undertaken through this investment.

A. Details of the scheme to be delivered:

The BCH will replace the current Bristol Cycle Centre at Old Whitchurch Athletics
Track in Bamfield. It aims to deliver an inclusive cycling community, offering
programmes for skill improvement, social prescribing, and physical rehabilitation.
The BCH will feature a safe traffic-free zone for cycling education and aligns with
the Bristol Bikeability’s mission to promote cycling as a viable and sustainable
transportation option, supporting the city’s strategic goals for a greener and more
accessible urban landscape.
Delivery of the BCH Project is contingent on securing full planning permission. In this
regard, a Full Planning Application (FPA) will be submitted for determination by BCC
- as a Regulation 3 planning application to ensure planning certainty. The proposed
BCH is a major strategic project and due consideration will be given to determining
the FPA in a timely and objective manner and mitigate associated delivery risks.
The BCH will be built on a former landfill site at Lawrence Weston in northwest
Bristol, which is one of the most deprived areas of the city. The facility will
incorporate the following components:
• Bikeability/learn to ride areas

4

Page 105
• A 1km competition standard cycling track

• Decarbonised amenity/operational building(s) and car/cycle parking facilities

• New connections to and upgrading of the local cycle network, as required

The BCH will be a transformative regional multi-purpose infrastructure that promotes
cycling, provides training and learning opportunities, hosts competition events,
delivers classes for disabled users, and serve as the focal point of Bristol’s travel
behaviour change programme. The flagship centre will help boost levels of cycling
and physical activity in the city and surrounding areas by delivering cycle training
and leisure activities alongside an extensive programme of sporting activities and
new pathways into sports cycling. The BCH will also act as a hub for delivering
targeted active travel and health programmes as well as local community
programmes, creating additional employment, training, and local inclusion benefits.
Infrastructure is only beneficial if people use it as intended. The proposed facility
will expand current capabilities at the temporary cycling centre by providing cycle
training to people of all ages and socioeconomic backgrounds, and across a much
wider geographic area. It will also assist in improving people’s understanding of travel
options so that cycling becomes more attractive, safer, and beneficial.
The BCH is a key plank of Bristol’s sustainability goals and aspirations and will be a
key enabler for cycling trips through training, competitions, as well as school
engagements to increase take up of cycling.
The project aims and objectives highlighted above align with CRSTS investment
objectives and will contribute to a sustained increase in active travel modes and
enable other legacy beneficial outcomes in the medium to longer term.
[Note: please include details of the intervention expected to ultimately be
delivered including the strategic fit, how the scheme is planned to be delivered
and the cost.
Programme information should be included in section 10b]

B. Details of the activities to be undertaken through this feasibility or development
phase:

5

Page 106
See section 9 below.

[Note: If the planned output is other than an Outline or Full Business Case or
Second Stage Skills Capital Application, please describe the scope and content of
thereport which will mark the completion of this phase]

9. Please set out how the activities to be undertaken through this Feasibility and
Development Funding Application will be managed and resourced. If use of
consultants or other third parties is proposed please describe how these have
been, or will be, procured.

BCC’s in-house project team, with collaborative support from a multidisciplinary
consultancy team that has been appointed via the BCC-SPI Procurement
Framework, will undertake the following primary activities for this phase:
• Preparation of an Outline Business Case (OBC). We will prepare a robust
and proportionate OBC (in consultation with WECA’s Grant Assurance Team)
to evaluate and justify the BCH proposals. The OBC will outline the rationale,
costs and risks associated with the BCH proposals with the aim of assisting
decision makers to determine whether it is viable and in alignment with
BCC’s strategic goals and CRSTS investment objectives. The Full Business
Case (FBC) is expected to be completed before September 2025.

• Preparation and submission of a Full Planning Application and Associated
Design Activities. We will prepare and submit a FPA for the BCH scheme,
along with all necessary supporting deliverables. While this proposal assumes
that the scheme is a major non-EIA development, confirmation will be
obtained through the required EIA Screening processes. Post-submission
activities are not covered in this phase of the project, but these will be
undertaken and completed in FY 25/26.

Technical inputs for this phase of the scheme will include:

✓ Project Management
✓ Business Case Development
✓ Cost Consultancy
✓ Town Planning
6

Page 107
✓ Environmental Planning (EIA)
✓ Architectural Services
✓ Landscape Design
✓ Transport Planning
✓ Water Resources, Drainage and Utilities
✓ Acoustics
✓ Ecology and Arboriculture
✓ Lands Contamination
✓ Sustainability and Energy
✓ Stakeholder Engagement
✓ Heritage
✓ Air Quality

10. What output will be produced using the funds awarded as part of this Feasibility and
Development Fund Application, and when will this be completed?

Mark with an Date (mm/yy)
X
Feasibility Study

Option Development

Option Assessment Report
X 09/24
Outline Business Case

Full Business Case

Second Stage Skills
Capital Application
X 04/25
Other (Full Planning
Application & Associated
Deliverables)

11. When do you plan to start and complete your project and what are
the main project milestones? Please include the milestones related
to the feasibility or development work to be undertaken through this
application and the milestones for the subsequent implementation
7

Page 108
phase through to completion.

A. Milestones for the activities through this Feasibility and Development Funding

Milestone Date
(mm/yy)
Complete Outline Business Case for WECA/BCC review and 09/24
approval
Submit Full Planning Application & Associated Deliverables 04/25

B. Planned milestones for scheme development or delivery beyond this initial phase.

Milestone Date
(mm/yy)
Full Business Case & Associated Designs 09/25
Full Planning Consent 12/25
Construction Start 01/26
Construction Complete 03/27

12. Application signs off by the promoting
organisation:

Senior Responsible Owner
Adam Crowther
Name:

Signature:

25/04/2024
Date:

8

Page 109
Section 151/Chief Finance Officer *
Richard Young
Name:

Signature:

23/07/2024
Date:

* Where WECA are the applicant, this should be signed by the appropriate Director/Head
of Service

9

Page 110
Aii

Page 111
Bristol Regional Cycling Hub
EDM Briefing
July 2024

Page 112
Strategic context
• Bristol Family Cycling Centre, which has been in existence since 2010, is currently operating from a temporary
location at the Old Whitchurch Athletics Track in Bamfield – this site is earmarked for housing development within the
next three years.

• The proposed Bristol Regional Cycling Hub (BRCH), which will replace the existing cycling centre in Bamfield, is a
strategic and transformative initiative by Bristol City Council (BCC) to create a regional inclusive cycling infrastructure
at a permanent site within the Henacre Open Space in Lawrence Weston, northwest Bristol.

• The flagship centre will help boost levels of cycling and physical activity in the city and surrounding areas by delivering
cycle training and leisure activities alongside an extensive programme of sporting activities and new pathways into
cycling. The BRCH will promote training and learning opportunities, host competition events, deliver classes for

Page 113
disabled users, and serve as the focal point of Bristol’s travel behaviour change programme.

• The aims and objectives highlighted above align with the City Region Sustainable Transport Settlement (CRSTS)
investment objectives and will contribute to a sustained increase in active travel modes and enable other legacy
beneficial outcomes in the medium to longer term.

• Delivery of the BRCH is contingent on developing a business case and securing full planning permission. In this regard, a
Full Planning Application (FPA) will be submitted for determination by BCC - as a Regulation 3 planning application to
ensure planning certainty. The proposed BRCH is a major strategic project and due consideration will be given to
determining the FPA in a timely and objective manner and mitigate associated delivery risks.

• BCC’s in-house project team, with support from a multidisciplinary consultancy team that has been appointed via the
BCC-SPI Procurement Framework, are carrying out project development activities including the business case
development and submission of the FPA alongside associated supporting evidence.
Geographic spread of customers (from post code plot) at
temporary cycling centre in Bamfield

Page 114
Proposed location in Lawrence Weston

Page 115
Outcomes/Benefits and Risks

Outcomes/Benefits Key Risks
• Regional cycling hub and sports facility to address current deficit
• Complement/enable other investments in cycle infrastructure Stakeholders
• Increased cycling participation across the West of England
Project Project
• Decarbonisation through modal shift Resource Assurance
Capacity and and Planning

Page 116
• Cycling as a safe, viable and sustainable transport mode Capability Application
Funding for
• Road safety training for scooters, cargo bikes & cycles Project
Development &
• Improved physical, emotional and mental wellbeing through social prescribing Delivery
• Support social/health interventions such as weight loss programmes Political and
Procurement
and
Governance
• Inclusive environment and support community cohesion Construction

• Job retention from existing cycling centre and new employment opportunities
Operational
• Skills acquisition/training, work experience and volunteering opportunities for the wider
community
• Collaboration with organisations such as LifeCycle & Bristol Bike Project
Funding
• Initial funding of £300k was earmarked from CRSTS Integrated Transport Block (ITB)
allocations for ongoing development of the business case and planning application
submission.
• This funding (£300k) will be replaced with £813k in CRSTS Investment Funding that was
approved on 27 June 2024 by the West of England Directors of Infrastructure. This funding
will enable development of an Outline Business Case and associated designs, as well as
submission of a Full Planning Application in April 2025.
• Based on previous funding bids, the projected capital cost for the BRCH is £15m including
risk contingency.

Page 117 • Awaiting decision on allocation of capital budget (£15m) from CRSTS overprogramming
within the next six months.
Main components of the Bristol Regional Cycling Hub

The BRCH will be built on a former landfill site at
Lawrence Weston in northwest Bristol, which is
one of the most deprived areas of the city. The
facility will incorporate the following:

• Bikeability/learn to ride areas
• A 1km competition standard cycling track

Page 118
• Decarbonised amenity/operational building(s)
and car/cycle parking facilities
• New connections to and upgrading of local
cycle network
• Landscaping and biodiversity enhancements
• Minor mitigation works on local highway
network at access point to site (TBC)
Site Plan (Provisional)
Aerial view showing proposed cycle tracks, car parks and
amenity/operational buildings

Page 119
Bikeability Track and Cycle Play Area

Page 120
Cycle Circuit

Page 121
Western view of the site showing the Cycle Circuit

Page 122
Main Office Building incorporating toilets, training
rooms and workshops

Page 123
Project Governance
Name BCC Role Project Role

Alex Hearn Director Economy of Place Accountable Director/Project Executive

Adam Crowther Head of City Transport Lead Officer (Senior Responsible Owner/Sponsor)

Alex Adeeko Transport Project Manager Project Manager

Page 124
Matthew Barrett Group Manager Sustainable Transport Senior User

Janine McCretton Cycle Centre Operations Manager Business Change Manager/User

Alan Berridge Engineering Design Manager Engineering Design Manager (Assurance)

Tom Gosden Principal Engineer Principal Engineer (Assurance)

Leon Dawkins Capital Projects Programme Manager BCC-SPI Framework Contract Manager

West of England Combined Authority N/A Project Delivery and Grant Assurance Oversight

ARCADIS BCC-SPI Framework Consultant Project Delivery Partner
Key Milestones

Project Life Cycle Activity Milestone

Complete Outline Business Case September/October 2024
Phase 1

Submit Full Planning Application & Associated Deliverables April 2025

Page 125
Complete Full Business Case & Associated Designs September 2025
Phase 2

Secure Full Planning Consent December 2025

Construction Start January 2026
Phase 3

Construction Complete March 2027
Draft letter of support: Bristol Cycling Centre – Levelling Up Fund

Darren Jones MP (Bristol North West)

• I am writing in support of the bid to the Levelling Up Fund from Bristol City Council for the
Bristol Cycling Centre.
• It will be based in the Bristol North West constituency but will benefit neighbouring
constituencies, local authority areas and the wider region.
• A successful LUF bid will enable the Council to construct, own and operate a new purpose-
built regional cycling centre incorporating a competition standard cycling track at
Avonmouth and Lawrence Weston, a ward within my constituency.
• The designs have been developed in close partnership with Sport England and British Cycling
and will provide a much-needed new facility for this part of the city.
• The Quality of Life 2020-21 survey found that 35% of residents in Avonmouth and Lawrence
Weston stated that they play sport once a week compared with the Bristol average of 41%.
The ward also has a lower rate of those who do enough regular exercise per week, with 59%
of residents achieving this compared with the Bristol average of 68%.
• Lawrence Weston also suffers from higher-than-average levels of obesity with 27% of
residents being obese compared with the Bristol average of 17% whilst a minority of
residents are satisfied with the provision of activities for children/young people. Satisfaction
with leisure facilities and services is also significantly lower than the Bristol average.
• A new Cycling Centre will be key element in the city’s strategy to increase the number of
people cycling. I welcome the fact it will cater for all ranges of physical abilities and ages and
attracts people from across a diverse range of socio-economic groups including many people
from areas of deprivation. The addition of a sporting activity will further broaden
participation among these groups across Bristol North West and beyond.
• This project and the proposed recreational use is also consistent with the open space
policies of the Lawrence Weston Neighbourhood Development Plan and the relevant
emerging policies in the local plan review.
• The Centre has strong local support and will provide opportunities for local community
engagement and for people to volunteer and gain skills across a range of areas that may be
useful for future employment.
• I also welcome the fact that once the new site is in operation, the space will offer more
health based activities and also an opportunity to visit Social Prescribing with GP’s and
Health Care providers.
• As the bid details, it is envisaged that that the Cycling Centre could partner with other
services and interventions relating to health including social isolation, mental health, injury
rehabilitation etc.
• The Centre will also provide additional social value by through work experience and
volunteering opportunities to young disabled and able-bodied people, older people and care
leavers.
Voi scooters blocking our gateway and pavement - Viewing a problem :: FixMyStreet (bristol.gov.uk)
https://fixmystreet.bristol.gov.uk/report/3606180

Page 126
Equality Impact Assessment [version 2.9]

Title: Bristol Regional Cycling Hub
☐ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☒ Service ☐ New
☐ Other [please state] ☐ Already exists / review ☒ Changing
Directorate: Growth & Regeneration Lead Officer name: Adam Crowther
Service Area: Economy of Place / City Transport Lead Officer role: Head of Service

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of an Equality Impact Assessment is to assist decision makers in understanding the impact of proposals
as part of their duties under the Equality Act 2010. Detailed guidance to support completion can be found here
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com).
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the process by someone with a good knowledge of the
proposal and service area, and sufficient influence over the proposal. It is good practice to take a team approach to
completing the equality impact assessment. Please contact the Equality and Inclusion Team early for advice and
feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Describe who it is aimed at and the intended aims /
outcomes. Where known also summarise the key actions you plan to undertake. Please use plain English, avoiding
jargon and acronyms. Equality Impact Assessments are viewed by a wide range of people including decision-makers
and the wider public.
The Bristol Cycling Centre has been in existence since 2010 and is currently operating from a temporary location at
the Old Whitchurch Athletics Track in Bamfield. The centre has been at this location for seven years, offering a
range of services to teach people how to ride cycles and improve their riding skills as well as programmes focusing
on inclusion, health and Active Travel. It provides a fully inclusive service catering for people of all ages and
abilities.
The cycling centre needs to relocate from its current site because the land is required for the New Hengrove Park
Development, and operations cannot continue at the Bamfield site beyond 2027 to ensure delivery of the final
phase of the housing development.
A new facility, Bristol Regional Cycling Hub (BRCH) will replace the existing cycling centre in Bamfield. The BRCH is
a strategic and transformative initiative by Bristol City Bristol City Council (BCC) to create a regional inclusive
cycling infrastructure at a permanent site within the Henacre/Merriman’ Open Space in Avonmouth & Lawrence
Weston Ward, northwest Bristol.

The focus of this preliminary EqIA is on the approval of expenditure to develop the business case and submit a full
planning application for the proposed cycling hub at Henacre/Merriman’s Open Space in Avonmouth & Lawrence
Weston Ward
Once this has been agreed and the approval is granted, the outcome of the business case and planning application
will enable the funding to be released to build the new BRCH.

This is a living document that will be updated as the project evolves.

Should the new funding not be forthcoming, or the BRCH site fails to get the necessary planning permissions, the
current site at Hengrove will close in 2027, it will not be replaced and there will be significant adverse impacts for
the service and its customers.

This is an assessment of the impacts of closing at the current site in Hengrove and relocating the current service to
the new Bristol Regional Cycling hub (BRCH) facility in Henacre/Merriman’s Open Space in Avonmouth &
Lawrence Weston Ward.
Page 127
Both sites need to be looked at in this EQIA as the Hengrove site will need to close regardless. There will be
significant positive impacts from relocating the service to the BRCH site but some negative impacts for those living
near the current site in Hengrove and adjacent areas, namely the loss of the facility itself. There is no space within
the Hengrove Park development to continue on the current site in any form.

The BRCH site offers the opportunity to deliver a more comprehensive range of services including major
programmes targeted, Bikeability and Active Travel, providing a sport cycling track, educational and volunteering
opportunities and addressing health and socio-economic inequalities as well as increased services for groups with
protected characteristics.

1.2 Who will the proposal have the potential to affect?
☒ Bristol City Council workforce ☒ Service users ☒ The wider community
☒ Commissioned services ☒ City partners / Stakeholder organisations
Additional comments: Also extensive programme of volunteering and work experience

1.3 Will the proposal have an equality impact?
Could the proposal affect access levels of representation or participation in a service, or does it have the potential to
change e.g. quality of life: health, education, or standard of living etc.?
If ‘No’ explain why you are sure there will be no equality impact, then skip steps 2-4 and request review by Equality
and Inclusion Team.
If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment, or if you plan to complete the assessment at a later stage please state
this clearly here and request review by the Equality and Inclusion Team.
☒ Yes ☐ No

Step 2: What information do we have?

2.1 What data or evidence is there which tells us who is, or could be affected?
Please use this section to demonstrate an understanding of who could be affected by the proposal. Include general
population data where appropriate, and information about people who will be affected with particular reference to
protected and other relevant characteristics: https://www.bristol.gov.uk/people-communities/measuring-equalities-
success .
Use one row for each evidence source and say which characteristic(s) it relates to. You can include a mix of
qualitative and quantitative data e.g. from national or local research, available data or previous consultations and
engagement activities.
Outline whether there is any over or under representation of equality groups within relevant services - don't forget
to benchmark to the local population where appropriate. Links to available data and reports are here Data, statistics
and intelligence (sharepoint.com). See also: Bristol Open Data (Quality of Life, Census etc.); Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA); Ward Statistical Profiles.

For workforce / management of change proposals you will need to look at the diversity of the affected teams using
available evidence such as HR Analytics: Power BI Reports (sharepoint.com) which shows the diversity profile of
council teams and service areas. Identify any over or under-representation compared with Bristol economically
active citizens for different characteristics. Additional sources of useful workforce evidence include the Employee
Staff Survey Report and Stress Risk Assessment Form

Page 128
Data / Evidence Summary of what this tells us
Source
[Include a reference
where known]
Profiled Customer The catchment for both the current and proposed site is local, citywide, and beyond as
attendances demonstrated in the postcode plot below. The development of the BRCH as a local, city
and regional development will attract people from across the geographical boundaries.
Many of the current customers come from within the city, from South Gloucestershire,
Bath and Northeast Somerset, North Somerset and beyond.
In terms of Quality of Life and Ward data, it is difficult to pinpoint which dataset to use in
the above context.
This is a living document that will be updated as the project evolves.
From the data available from the current site:
There is c.20,000 customer attendances per year at the current site and predicted
numbers at the BRCH ranging from approximately c.60,000 in the first year through to
c.97,000 by year 3.
Some services users with protected characteristics can be determined by the session type
e.g. people attending disability sessions will be disabled, and people attending session for
older people will be in older age categories, however, most activities are open to all and
will not necessarily record participants with protected characteristics. Some activities
require monitoring to claim funding, e.g Bikeability courses collect data on gender, age,
SEND status etc.

By the nature of the service offers the Centre attracts above average representation of
some groups with protected characteristics, for example children account for more than
50% of attendances and disabled people for around 25%.
There is a fairly even gender representation among children but not among young adults
and older people. Data on race and religion is lacking but is likely that there are groups
who are under-represented.
People participating in volunteering, work experience and skills training programmes have
high representation of younger people currently with pupils on Work experience and
Duke of Edinburgh Award Schemes. At the BRCH there will be greater volunteering and
skills training provision.

Postcode analysis Analysis of customer postcodes shows that the current centre attracts customers from all
areas of the city as well as having a significant regional catchment area (see map below).
Demographic profiling of postcodes shows a significant proportion of customers are from
areas of high deprivation. People are willing to travel to use the Centre as this is the only
facility of this type in Bristol and there are only limited options for inclusive cycling in the
region. The BRCH will be both a local, regional, and national centre for cycling. From
anecdotal advice from British Cycling, sports cyclists are likely to travel from Cornwall,
Wales, across as far as London and up to the West Midlands for races and competitions.
Customer postcode origins.
Bristol Cycling Centre registrants (arcgis.com) April 2024

The below is all the postcode data collected over the years the current centre has been
open. This dataset is not complete and is compiled from the data that people have
voluntarily provided. Postcode is not a compulsory field on the current booking system.

Page 129
Data / Evidence Summary of what this tells us
Source
[Include a reference
where known]

Staff profiles A higher-than-average proportion of current staff fall in the older age category, though in
recent months staff that are in the 25 to 35 age bracket have been recruited to both the
Operations and Cycling Instructor teams.

2.2 Do you currently monitor relevant activity by the following protected characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☐ Gender Reassignment
☐ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☐ Pregnancy/Maternity ☐ Race
☐ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☐ Sexual Orientation

2.3 Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
Where there are gaps in the evidence, or you don’t have enough information about some equality groups, include an
equality action to find out in section 4.2 below. This doesn’t mean that you can’t complete the assessment without
the information, but you need to follow up the action and if necessary, review the assessment later. If you are
unable to fill in the gaps, then state this clearly with a justification.
For workforce related proposals all relevant characteristics may not be included in HR diversity reporting (e.g.
pregnancy/maternity). For smaller teams diversity data may be redacted. A high proportion of not known/not
disclosed may require an action to address under-reporting.

There are some gaps in the supporting evidence arising from the amount of work required to manually collate
information that could be expanded on if this EQIA progresses.
Within the information that is held some courses are monitored in more depth than others, particularly ones that
are eligible for grant funding. There are gaps in data on race, sexual orientation, religion /Belief, Gender
reassignment etc. A planned Customer Management System and bespoke booking system would enable more
comprehensive information to be collected and analysed, but we are not in a position to procure this whilst there
is uncertainty over the future of the service.
Planned programmes aimed at addressing transport deprivation, health inequality and social isolation will include
more detailed monitoring if the BRCH secures funding and planning approval.
Although not all characteristics are currently quantifiable, the operational and cycle training staff who have
ongoing client contact will for some characteristics be able to identify areas where there are clear over / under-
representation which can aid decision making in the absence of hard data.
Page 130
2.4 How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
You will nearly always need to involve and consult with internal and external stakeholders during your assessment.
The extent of the engagement will depend on the nature of the proposal or change. This should usually include
individuals and groups representing different relevant protected characteristics. Please include details of any
completed engagement and consultation and how representative this had been of Bristol’s diverse communities. See
https://www.bristol.gov.uk/people-communities/equalities-groups.
Include the main findings of any engagement and consultation in Section 2.1 above.

If you are managing a workforce change process or restructure please refer to Managing change or restructure
(sharepoint.com) for advice on consulting with employees etc. Relevant stakeholders for engagement about
workforce changes may include e.g. staff-led groups and trades unions as well as affected staff.
Due to the uncertainty of funding, there has been very little engagement with stakeholders to date. They have not
been involved or consulted at this provisional stage to avoid creating unnecessary work, or raising expectation of
new provision that could not necessarily be delivered.
There was some community and stakeholder engagement for previous unsuccessful funding bids. There is public
engagement planned for later this year from October onwards once there is funding certainty.
Workforce:The current Cycling Centre employs a mix of full-time and part-time staff to manage the Centre and
deliver the cycling activities. Around 15 Bristol City Council staff are employed at the current centre. This would
increase when the BRCH is operational and also offer employment to sports coaches and other trainers though
not necessarily employed by BCC. A higher-than-average proportion of current staff fall in the older age category,
though in recent months staff that are in the 25 to 35 age brackets have been recruited to both the Operations
and Cycling Instructor teams.

There would also be minor revenue impacts on other BCC services who support the centre e.g Parks are paid to
undertake some of the grounds maintenance, this will hopefully continue on the BRCH site.

A number of partner organisations support service delivery including local third sector cycling organisations-
Bristol Bike Project and Lifecycle – who are contracted to provide cycle maintenance services and Cycle Trainers to
support peak-time delivery periods. Closure at the current site in Hengrove may result in impacts on their staff
and there may be broader impacts as these organisations rely on contracts with BCC to support their wider
operations and activities in the City. However, these organisations will form part of the planned Stakeholder
Engagement later this year and the results of that taken into consideration. Other organisations may want to
either co locate or operate from the BRCH.

Partners
In addition to the cycling organisations listed above BCC also work with a number of health providers and sporting
organisations to deliver inclusive cycling activities and targeted health and active travel programmes aimed at
reducing inequalities. These programmes wouldn’t be adversely affected or impossible to deliver if the Centre
relocated, provided transport links do not become a barrier. Other organisations from the north of the city are
likely to want to either co locate or operate from the BRCH.
There are considerations made within the new office areas at the BRCH as part of the building design for BCC staff
to be able to hot desk at the new location.

Through the volunteering and training activities there are also links with Colleges, social services, job centres and
community groups.

Clients.
Some of the Centre’s client groups are listed below. Many of the schools listed will be utilising the adapted cycles
and specialist disability services. Most of the groups and SEND schools used to come to the original pilot project in
St Agnes Park in the centre of the city, they still come to the centre in Hengrove, and most will make the journey
to the new BRCH in the north of the city, however some won’t, and other groups will find it easier geographically.
This is demonstrated by the postcode plot above in this document. People are prepared to travel for the facilities
that are offered.

Page 131
2nd Portishead Scout Group - Scouts
Access Sport - Sports Organisation
Affinity Trust - Care Provider
Autism Home Ed - Home educated children
Bean Learning (Home Ed) - Home educated children
Beavers - Scout type group
Backwell - School
Belgrave - School
Brandon Trust - Care Provider
Blaise High - School
Briarwood Nexus - School
Briarwood Primary - School
Briarwood Secondary - School
Bristol Autism Project - Disability Organisation
Bridge Learning Campus - School
City Of Bristol College - College
Castle - School
Community Links - Care Provider
Concrete Therapy Runners - Running Group
Culverhill School
Direct Line - Sponsored event at centre
EDU Access - Care Provider
Claremont - School
Frame Runners - Cerebral Palsy Group (MOU)
Elmfield - School
HMS Flying Fox - Time trials for new recruits private hire
Keynsham Mencap - Disability Organisation
Hareclive - School
Kingsweston - School
Kingsweston Napier Miles - School
Kingsweston Shire - School
Knowle West Health Park - Care Provider
Knowle DGE - School
Nat Autistic Soc - Disability Organisation
Neptune School
Merchants - School
Props - Care Provider
New Fosseway - School
Sandford/Churchill Cubs - Scout type group
Sense - Disability Organisation
SHINE - Disability Organisation
SilvaCare - Care Provider
Sirona Care OT - OT childrens Holiday scheme
South Glos College - College
Southville Runner - Running Group
Special Friends Club - Disability Organisation
The Aurora group - Care Provider
The Family Centre (Deaf Children) - Disability Organisation
the Freya foundation - Disability Organisation Sponsored event at centre
Three trees - Care Provider
Page 132
Ravenswood - School
Venturers - School
Voyage Care - Care Provider
Victoria Park - School
Wansdyke - School
WECIL - Disability Organisation
Whitchurch Beavers - Scout type group
Warmley Park - School

2.5 How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
Explain how you will continue to engage with stakeholders throughout the course of planning and delivery. Please
describe where more engagement and consultation is required and set out how you intend to undertake it. Include
any targeted work to seek the views of under-represented groups. If you do not intend to undertake it, please set
out your justification. You can ask the Equality and Inclusion Team for help in targeting particular groups.
Engagement hasn’t started. The current Centre will close and relocate there will need to be an ongoing
stakeholder / customer engagement and Comms strategy. This is planned to start in October 2024 and run
through the planning process.

Step 3: Who might the proposal impact?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered above, and the characteristics protected by the Equality Act 2010.
Also include details of existing issues for particular groups that you are aware of and are seeking to address or
mitigate through this proposal. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying potential impacts etc.
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com)

3.1 Does the proposal have any potentially adverse impacts on people based on their protected or other
relevant characteristics?
Consider sub-categories (different kinds of disability, ethnic background etc.) and how people with combined
characteristics (e.g. young women) might have particular needs or experience particular kinds of disadvantage.
Where mitigations indicate a follow-on action, include this in the ‘Action Plan’ Section 4.2 below.
GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many groups)
There will be significant positive impacts from relocating the service to the BRCH site but some negative impacts
for those living near the current site in Hengrove and adjacent areas, namely the loss of the facility itself. There is
no space within the Hengrove Park development to continue on the current site in any form. Some of those
participants will fall into one or more groups based on their protected or other relevant characteristics.
A Transport Assessment as part of the Outline and Full Business case will be provided which is likely to show that
some people who currently attend the site may find it difficult to access the new site as the current transport links
may be too costly financially or timewise, or they may not have access to other means of transport.
Please note, many of our customers will fall into multiple protected characteristic groups so some figures
referenced will include double or triple counting.
The below sections will have a negative adverse impact on some and positive impact on those who will now have
access to the site or those who can travel.
There will be significant positive impacts from relocating the service to the BRCH site but some negative impacts
for those living near the current site in Hengrove and adjacent areas, namely the loss of the facility itself. There is
no space within the Hengrove Park development to continue on the current site in any form.
A Transport Assessment as part of the Outline and Full Business case will be provided which is likely to show that
some people who currently attend the site may find it difficult to access the new site as the current transport links
may be too costly financially or timewise, or they may not have access to other means of transport.

Page 133
The business and social value case has been well established by the operation of the centre at Bristol Cycling
Centre Hengrove Park over the past 7 years and will be demonstrated in the OBC and FBC. The Centre delivers a
wide range of cycle training services to adults and children as part of BCC’s Active Travel, Road Safety and Public
Health programmes, contributing to a broad range of BCC Transport, public health, economic and sustainability
objectives.
On a personal level, taking up cycling can make a major contribution to people’s physical and mental health as
well as improving people’s access to employment, services, leisure and social opportunities.
The centre is fully inclusive and offers a range of low-cost services to people of all ages and abilities and the
majority of the current customer base includes people with one or more protected characteristic as well as socio-
economic and health inequality. With around 20,000 customer visits at the current centre the relocation of the
service would have positive impacts at a strategic, community and personal level. The predicted customer visit
numbers at the BRCH ranges from approximately c.60,000 in the first year through to c.97,000 by year 3.

The service works with multiple partner organisations and community groups (see section 2.4) to deliver the core
programme of cycling activities as well as providing volunteering, training and skills development and employment
opportunities and acting as a hub for the delivery of broader Active Travel and health-based programmes. The
new site will enable a greater reach within communities in the city providing access to a traffic free sports racing
circuit and new opportunities for training and employment beyond the services currently offered. The design of
the new buildings incorporates a large teaching workshop which can be used to deliver courses for mechanics
training from basic cycle maintenance through to qualifications in City & Guilds /Cyctech.
The list of activities below provides an overview of the breadth of the current and future service offers, other
programmes such as social prescribing, active travel, health improvement (obesity reduction, diabetes, heart
health etc) will signpost people to these services or run bespoke programmes where funding allows. Other
sessions will be looked at as the new BRCH proposals are firmed up and out to public engagement and
consultation.
Activity / Target Audience
• After School Sessions- early evening cycling
• Autism Home Ed - home educated children and children with ASD and other disabilities.
• Back2Biking - older riders
• Balance ( Bikeability Plus module) - pre riders- any age
• Bike Club adults - adult riders.
• Bike Club Kids - child riders.
• Bike Exchange - kids and adults in conjunction with other not for profit organisations/low-cost 2nd hand cycles.
• Bike Marking - everyone.
• Bikeability Fix ( Bikeability plus module) - children
• BMX - beginners, intermediate
• Brownies/Scouts /Beavers etc working towards badges -kids and leaders.
• Disability Cycling – daily sessions for disabled adults and children.
• Cargo Bike training
• Cycle Superheroes - primary schools.
• Cycle Superheroes - secondary schools.
• Cyclo X - children who can ride.
• Early Morning – training sessions
• E-Scooter training
• Evening open sessions - everyone
• Events and fun days - everyone profile raising.
• Events for Regional and National Sports Cycling
• Family Cycling - families and friends
• Family disability – families with disabled adults, disabled children, siblings, and friends
• Frame Running - Cerebral Palsy
• Go Ride Kids - Sports clubs child riders.
• Holiday Club - kids with accompanying adults
• Inclusive Cycling (Disability Cycling) - disabled riders
• Learn to Ride ( Bikeability plus module) - ready to ride - any age
• Learn to Ride 8+ ( Bikeability for older learners) - over eights and adults
Page 134
• Learn to Ride Next Steps (Bikeability plus module) - people who can just ride
• Level 1 ( Bikeability) - age 7 plus
• Level 2 (Bikeability) - age 9 plus
• Level 3 ( Bikeability) - age 11 plus
• Over 55's - over 55's
• Physio/Occupational therapy – health professionals and their clients
• Private hire sessions - Birthday parties
• Private Hire Sessions – Organisations/charities
• Private Hire Sessions- Corporate social responsibility/volunteering
• Private Hire Sessions- Corporate training days
• Private Hire Sessions- Corporate away days/team building
• Rock Up and Ride - everyone
• Runners - runners
• Rusty Biker - returners with low confidence
• SEND (Bikeability SEND funding) - SEND children both in special and mainstream schools.
• Social Cycle - older and isolated adults
• Sports Coaching (children- beginners, intermediate) – children
• Sports Coaching – adults
• Sports Coaching- Club Sessions
• This Girl Can - Women and Girls
• Trailer Tots - parents/carers with babies and toddlers
• Trailers, Tag alongs and Tandems(3t's) - parents transporting children
• Women’s Cycling - women and girls
PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: The Cycling Centre offers an extensive programme of activities aimed at young
people including teaching them to ride and riding for fun, health or sport,
including holiday programmes. These range from very young children though
school age to older children and young adults. The majority of the current
service users are children (Est 60%) many of whom will also fall within other
protected characteristic categories or from disadvantaged backgrounds.

With a range of bikes to use and low service costs of £4 per session for young
people, the centre caters for people who cannot access other services or would
not get cycle training at their school.

The centre also offers skills training (e.g bike maintenance, extensive volunteer
opportunities (including duke of Edinburgh), work experience, of which the
majority of participants are younger people. There are around 1,000 hours of
volunteer / development time at the Centre per year with plans to expand the
programme. Several young people have progressed from volunteering positions
and government back to work programmes into paid employment at the
centre.

Mitigations: It would be possible to transfer some training of children to delivery in schools in the
south of the city but would not be able to offer range of inclusive cycling options and
would only mitigate a very small element of the current inclusive cycling programme.
The expanded BRCH will have a positive impact for those who can access and as
mentioned most of the schools who provide SEND provision are able to travel.
Age: Older People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • The centre provides a safe environment for older people to cycle. The majority
of sessions at the centre are open to all ages (except children only sessions),
and there are also specific sessions aimed at older returning riders or reducing
social isolation and increasing physical activity among older people. Other
Page 135
sessions have a more family focus and aim to encourage inter-generational
cycling with all ages cycling together.
Although the ages of adults are not currently recorded for most sessions, we
know that the services we offer provide a valuable service for older people and
that group will be an increasing focus of future programmes, including partner
programmes with health providers, care facilities and housing associations.
Mitigations: • None if the service closes for some who can’t travel. Others in the north of the
city would be able to access the BRCH who haven’t had access previously.
Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • The services offered by the Cycling Centre are extensively used by people with a
range of impairments. The centre is fully equipped for all levels of ability including a
fleet of adapted and specialist bikes, trikes and quads / e-bikes etc and a changing
places unit so even people with the most severe levels of disability can participate.
The centre runs regular disability sessions, and all other sessions are inclusive and
are used by people with a broad range of impairments. Many clients find they can
develop the skills, strength and confidence to go on to ride independently, others
visit the centre regularly for exercise and enjoyment, and for some that is the only
physical activity they get.
In 20219/20 there were more than 5,000 customer visits from people recorded
as being disabled, of which more than 3,000 were children, (and there will have
been more who have disabilities that are not captured). The centre is also used
for physical rehabilitation e.g. after injury, stroke or heart issues.
Many of the groups who come from day centres, schools and as individuals
have access to minibuses and other transport, this is how they currently access
our services,
Mitigations: • Disabled groups such as day care centres, homes and schools as well as
individuals have access to minibuses and other transport, this is how they
currently access our services.
Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: The gender profile of customers varies by activity, with typically higher levels of female
participation on the learn to ride courses and skills refresher courses, and a more even
split among school age children. a sample of courses are listed below.

Course Male % Female %
Learn to Ride 40 60
Cycle Kidz 50 50
Bikeability Level 1 50 50
Bikeability Level 2 50 50
Open sessions 50 50
Disability Sessions 60 40

There are also some women-only variants of some courses.
Mitigations: See general comments above.
Sexual orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: All sessions are open to everyone so will be used by people with a range of sexual
orientations, but this is not currently monitored
Mitigations:
Pregnancy / Maternity Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: Services are extensively used by people with toddlers and young children but are not
focused specifically at pregnancy / maternity. All activities are fully inclusive so are
likely to be used by people in this group but this is not monitored.
Mitigations:
Gender reassignment Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: All sessions are open to everyone but this is not currently monitored
Mitigations:
Page 136
Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic groups are under-represented in participation in
cycling generally and it is proposed to develop activities to address this in the future but
is not a main focus of the current programme. Some groups within this category will
attend existing sessions but this is not monitored.
Mitigations:
Religion or Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Belief
Potential impacts: Some religious groups are under-represented in participation in cycling and it is
proposed to develop activities to address this in the future but is not a main focus of
the current programme. Some groups will attend existing sessions but this is not
monitored.
Mitigations:
Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
civil partnership
Potential impacts: This is not recorded
Mitigations:
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS
Socio-Economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: Loss of low-cost service that is used by those on lower-incomes including the areas of
high deprivation surrounding the Centre. There may be a loss of service offers,
targeted directly at addressing social economic deprivation and also health
inequality and social isolation which closely mirrors other deprivation indices.
Mitigations: The new site will give easier access to those groups in the north of the city who have
not been able to access sessions for similar reasons although not all current clients
would be able to travel elsewhere.
Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Many carers use the specialist and general services offered by the Centre.
Mitigations: Most have access to transport which is how they access the site currently with their
service users. Parent /carers with Disabled children often have access to transport
though some won’t. For people living in the north of the city they will be able to access
a service they previously haven’t been able to.
Other groups [Please add additional rows below to detail the impact for other relevant groups as appropriate e.g.
Asylums and Refugees; Looked after Children / Care Leavers; Homelessness]
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:

3.2 Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their protected or other relevant characteristics?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our Public Sector Equality Duty to:
✓ Eliminate unlawful discrimination for a protected group
✓ Advance equality of opportunity between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t
✓ Foster good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t

The adverse benefits mentioned above are also positive benefits to those who will now be able to access the
services of the new BRCH in Avonmouth & Lawrence Weston Ward, both locations have high indices of
deprivation.

Page 137
Step 4: Impact

4.1 How has the equality impact assessment informed or changed the proposal?
What are the main conclusions of this assessment? Use this section to provide an overview of your findings. This
summary can be included in decision pathway reports etc.
If you have identified any significant negative impacts which cannot be mitigated, provide a justification showing
how the proposal is proportionate, necessary, and appropriate despite this.

Summary of significant negative impacts and how they can be mitigated or justified:
A decision on the funding for the new BRCH and relocation of the activities of the Cycling Centre has not been
made yet. The focus of this preliminary EqIA is on the approval of expenditure to develop the business case and
submit a full planning application for the proposed cycling hub at Henacre/Merriman’s Open Space in Avonmouth
& Lawrence Weston Ward
Once this has been agreed and the approval is granted, the outcome of the business case and planning application
will enable the funding to be released to build the new BRCH.
This is a living document that will be updated as the project evolves.
Should the new funding not be forthcoming, or the BRCH site fails to get the necessary planning permissions, the
current site at Hengrove will close in 2027, it will not be replaced and there will be significant adverse impacts for
the service and its customers.
The negative impacts of service closure and relocation would be extensive for some people but beneficial to those
in the north of the city.
It will remove a popular and well-used service in the south of Bristol which may result in fewer people being
trained / having the confidence to cycle in those areas. However, it will benefit those in the north of Bristol which
currently is negatively impacting on local and national objectives on transport, health, climate and sustainability,
negatively impacting on people’s lives, health and opportunities by lowering participation in a low-cost and
healthy activity.

In terms of protected characteristics, it will impact most heavily on younger people families and older people, as
well as people who are socially or economically disadvantaged, in the south of the city but beneficial to those in
the north who currently don’t have access to services.
Should funding not be forthcoming then it would impact on all citizens of Bristol and closure will occur in 2027
as there is no suitable sized site identified that could deliver the services that are currently offered.
The loss of support to broader services such as Active Travel services and health-based programmes could make it
difficult and more expensive in the future to deliver positive interventions aimed at addressing inequality and
increasing opportunity by no longer being able to offer a delivery hub and a cost-effective scale of delivery.
The loss of training, development and employment opportunities would impact on a smaller number of people
but that lost opportunity in many cases could be significant.
Closure would also impact on delivery partners and stakeholders and well as resulting in reputational damage
locally and potentially with funding bodies who are increasingly requiring evidence of inclusivity in funding bids.
If the service is closed and not relocated then the almost all of the impacts would not be mitigated.
One area of potential mitigation would possibly be to transfer some of the Bikeability cycle training for children
training to delivery in schools, but this would significantly narrow the customer base, would not be available to all
schools, and would mean no longer being able to offer a range of inclusive cycling options. This would only
mitigate a very small element of the current inclusive cycling programme.
It could also potentially make delivery of other linked interventions e.g health based programmes, social
prescribing, active travel programmes more costly or less effective

Summary of positive impacts / opportunities to promote the Public Sector Equality Duty:
There would be no positive impact from terminating the Cycling Centre services entirely.

Page 138
4.2 Action Plan
Use this section to set out any actions you have identified to improve data, mitigate issues, or maximise
opportunities etc. If an action is to meet the needs of a particular protected group please specify this.
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale
Progress current funding opportunity, to OBC, FBC and planning Head of Service City 2025-2026
application . Transport
Build new BRCH – would fully mitigate loss of current site and Head of Service City 2027 if the funding
would enable a significant broadening of programme including Transport is secured
activity targeted at groups with protected characteristics and
disadvantaged groups. New centre would include customer
management system that would fill current data gaps.
If service is not funded and has to close – it would be possible to Group Manger –
transfer some training of children to delivery in schools, but this Sustainable
would significantly narrow the customer base, would not be able Transport
to offer range of inclusive cycling options and would only mitigate
a very small element of the current inclusive cycling programme.

4.3 How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
How will you know if you have been successful? Once the activity has been implemented this equality impact
assessment should be periodically reviewed to make sure your changes have been effective your approach is still
appropriate.
Monitoring of other options would be developed if it was decided to fund these.
A CRM and Booking system will be procured in advance of the relocation as it will be necessary to manage,
monitor and report on many deliverables and outputs.
If the service is not funded and must close there will not be much mitigation to measure, only any increase in the
number of children trained at schools and the decrease in Disabled / children with SEND trained resulting from no
longer having specialist facilities to train these groups.

Step 5: Review
The Equality and Inclusion Team need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your EqIA. EqIAs
should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers on the equalities
impact of the proposal. Please seek feedback and review from the Equality and Inclusion Team before requesting
sign off from your Director1.
Equality and Inclusion Team Review: Director Sign-Off:
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

Date: 22/08/2024 Date: 22/08/2024

Page 139
Environmental Impact Assessment [version 1.0]
Proposal title: Bristol Regional Cycling Hub (Draft Copy)
Project stage and type: ☐ Initial Idea Mandate ☒ Outline Business Case ☐ Full Business Case
☐ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☒ New ☐ Changing
☐ Other [please state] ☐ Already exists / review
Directorate: EOP Lead Officer name: Adam Crowther
Service Area: Economy of Place / City Transport Lead Officer role: Head of Service

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of this Environmental Impact Assessment is to help you develop your proposal in a way that is
compliant with the council’s policies and supports the council’s strategic objectives under the One City Climate
Strategy, the One City Ecological Emergency Strategy and the latest Corporate Strategy.
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the project proposal process by someone with a good
knowledge of the project, the service area that will deliver it, and sufficient influence over the proposal to make
changes as needed.
It is good practice to take a team approach to completing the Environmental Impact Assessment. See further
guidance on completing this document. Please email environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk early for advice
and feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Please use plain English, avoiding jargon and
acronyms.
This is a draft version. As figures, plans and detail emerge they will be added to this document.

Bristol City Council’s (BCC) Strategic City Transport have procured a Strategic Partner (SP) to develop the Outline
Business Case/Full Business Case (OBC/FBC) and Planning Application under the Strategic Partner Initiative (SPI).
This involves several outputs including reports, designs, appraisals, costings, and recommendations. The relevant
teams from BCC, where appropriate, are also providing advice and information to develop this proposal. Including,
but not limited to BCC Parks, Ecology, Nature Conservation, Transport, Engagement, Sports and Physical Activity,
Public Health, Planning, Arboriculture, and Sustainability.

Bristol Cycling Centre is currently operating from a temporary location at the Old Whitchurch Athletics Track in
Bamfield Track in Bamfield –– this site is earmarked for housing development within the next three years. The
proposed Bristol Regional Cycling Hub (BRCH), which will replace the existing cycling centre in Bamfield, is a
strategic and transformative initiative by BCC to create a regional inclusive cycling infrastructure at a permanent
site within the Henacre /Merriman’s Open Space areas n Lawrence Weston & Shirehampton, northwest Bristol.

The plan entails a 1km wide 6m tarmac closed loop cycling circuit, a modular 2 story building with several shipping
containers for storage, a food concession space and car parking. The site will be fenced around the perimeter
with 3m weldmesh fencing to prevent antisocial behaviour and there will be access control to both the car park
and centre itself, the fence also ensures the safeguarding of our vulnerable adults and children when they are on
site.

The BRCH underlines the importance of cycling as a key component of BCC’s sustainable transport, urban
development, public health, and socioeconomic policy goals. It is dedicated to increasing cycling participation,
nurturing an inclusive environment, and reinforcing the crucial role of Bristol Bikeability in realising these in
Page 140
realising these goals. It will be a key enabler for cycling trips through training, competitions, as well as school
engagements to increase take up of cycling.

The new facility will expand current operational capabilities at the temporary cycling centre by providing cycle
training to people of all ages and socioeconomic backgrounds, and across a much wider geographic area. The
BRCH aims to deliver an inclusive cycling community, offering programmes for skills improvement, social
prescribing, and physical rehabilitation. It will also act as a hub for delivering targeted active travel and health
programmes as well as local community programmes, creating additional employment, training, and local
inclusion benefits.

The BRCH will promote training and learning opportunities, host competition events, deliver classes for disabled
users, and serve as the focal point of Bristol’s travel behaviour change programme. It will feature a safe traffic--
free zone for cycling education and aligns with the Bristol's Bikeability mission to promote cycling as a viable and
sustainable transportation option, supporting the city's goals for a greener and more accessible urban landscape.

The BRCH will also assist in improving people’s understanding of travel options so that cycling becomes attractive
and safer.

The flagship centre will help boost levels of cycling and physical activity in the city and surrounding areas by
delivering cycle training and leisure activities alongside an extensive programme of sporting activities and new
pathways into sports cycling. It will incorporate a competition –grade track allowing high speeds and safe racing
conditions. Competition grade tracks such as that proposed for the BRCH are used for events and are built to
accommodate local and national championship competitions.

1.2 Will the proposal have an environmental impact?
Could the proposal have either a positive or negative effects for the environment now or in the future? If ‘No’
explain why you are sure there will be no environmental impact, then skip steps 2-3 and request review by sending
this form to environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk

If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment.
☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

The space is currently classified in the local neighbourhood plan as an area of important local space and within
the adopted Core Strategy as Important Open Space and part of the Avonmouth and Kingsweston Levels. It is
shown on Pinpoint as owned by Bristol City Council Parks.

It is a former pre-1970’s landfill site and contaminated with a variety of contaminants including asbestos, tars and
oils, heavy metals and ground gases associated with such contamination. There is a recent land contamination and
remediation report that has been commissioned for this development which covers these in detail and suggests
ways to remediate to ensure the proposed development can proceed.

The land, at some point was capped with topsoil and left undisturbed, it is now overgrown with pitting and
pooling in parts of the site. There is poor drainage and at the western end of the site there are reports of flooding
after periods of heavy rains attracting rats and other vermin. Parts of the site are overgrown with brambles and
there are areas that contain Japanese Knotweed and Giant Hogweed alongside the Barracks Rhyne.

There are several hedges that have been planted across the site from north to south, a line of trees and dense
scrub that runs west to east and a line of mature trees bordering the southern edge, some of which will need to
be removed and re-provided on other parts of the site as part of landscaping and Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG).
This proposal, whilst using this important open space for cycling and sports use, is an acceptable use in terms of
the planning policy and offers benefits to local residents, in terms of site usage, employment, volunteering and
training for both the local community and improvements and maintenance to existing public open space.

Page 141
The BNG requirement that came into force in January 2024 will require an increase of 10% on the site. Ecology
surveys are underway and an ecological assessment including BNG will be provided which will demonstrate the
baseline value, the expected value of the proposed development, and a BNG management plan will be secured
through appropriate planning conditions.

The latest ecological surveys and the Ecological Assessment will be available once reports are complete, however
there are reports that were commissioned before the Covid pandemic which are now out of date that can be
made available. These include surveys for reptiles, great crested newts, water voles, bats and nesting birds. An
Environmental Impact Assessment is part of this commission. BCC Ecology Teams are aware of this proposed
development and are working with our SPs to confirm the scope of surveys required.

There have also previously been arboriculture surveys conducted to assess the condition of existing trees on the
site. These are being reviewed as part of this plan, prior to submission of the Planning Application.

Consideration of materials used across site for buildings and pathways is a priority, there is an energy
management and decarbonisation brief in development as part of the OBC, FBC and for the Planning Application;
this has been commented on by our Sustainability Team within BCC to inform the development.
The use of solar and air or ground source heating will be considered as well as potential green roof elements
where applicable and the buildings will assume high BREAM standards as a requirement.

There are rills and attenuation ponds planned as part of the management of water run off which can be planted
and used to increase the biodiversity. Our BCC flood risk team were consulted prior to the Covid pandemic, and
this work will be revisited, and a revised report produced as part of OBC/FBC and Planning Application.

1.3 If the proposal is part of an options appraisal, has the environmental impact of each option
been assessed and included in the recommendation-making process?
If ‘Yes’ please ensure that the details of the environmental impacts of each option are made clear in the pros and
cons section of the project management options appraisal document.

☐ Yes ☐ No ☒ Not applicable [please select]

If ‘No’ explain why environmental impacts have not been considered as part of the options appraisal process.
Not applicable at this stage of the draft version. Though there are several reports in progress mentioned in the
above narrative that are addressing the environmental aspects of the design, construction, build and management
of the site.

Step 2: What kinds of environmental impacts might the project have?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying
potential impacts.
Does the proposal create any benefits for the environment, or have any adverse impacts?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our corporate environmental objectives and the wider One City Climate and Ecological Emergency
strategies.
Page 142
Consider how the proposal creates environmental impacts in the following categories, both now and in the future.
Reasonable efforts should be made to quantify stated benefit or adverse impacts wherever possible.

Where the proposal is likely to have a beneficial impact, consider what actions would enhance those impacts. Where
the proposal is likely to have a harmful impact, consider whether actions would mitigate these impacts.

Enhancements or mitigation actions are only required when there is a likely impact identified. Remember that where
enhancements or mitigation actions are listed, they should be assigned to staff and appropriately resourced.

GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many categories)

Cycling is a sustainable transport mode enhancing decarbonisation
through modal shift. The BRCH underlines the importance of cycling
as a key component of BCC’s sustainable transport, urban
development, public health, and socioeconomic policy goals. It is
dedicated to increasing cycling participation, nurturing an inclusive
ENV1 Carbon neutral: environment, and reinforcing the crucial role of Bristol Bikeability in
Emissions of climate realising these in realising these goals.
changing gases It will be a key enabler for cycling trips through training, competitions,
as well as school engagement to increase take up increase take up of
BCC has committed to cycling.
achieving net zero emissions The BRCH is a site dedicated to cycling and will be enabling current
for its direct activities by and future generations to learn to cycle.
2025, and to support the city All the cycling Instructors at the centre are National Standards
in achieving net zero by qualified Bikeability Instructors.
2030. Teaching all participants to cycle safely will contribute not only to
Benefits road safety outcomes but will contribute to supporting the city to
Will the proposal involve achieve net zero.
transport, or the use of The new facility will provide cycle training to people of all ages and
energy in buildings? Will the socioeconomic backgrounds, and across a much wider geographic
proposal involve the area. The BCH aims to deliver an inclusive cycling community, offering
purchase of goods or programmes for skills improvement, social prescribing, and physical
services? If the answer is yes rehabilitation. It will also act as a hub for delivering targeted active
to either of these questions, travel and health programmes as well as local community
there will be a carbon programmes, creating additional employment, training, and local
impact. inclusion benefits.

Consider the scale and The development will also provide an upgrade to the NCN 41 cycling
timeframe of the impact, network alongside the site with the provision of an enhanced walking
particularly if the proposal and cycling route. This will support the promotion of Active Travel
will lead to ongoing within the wider community and not just users of the BRCH facility.
emissions beyond the 2025
and 2030 target dates. Infrastructure is only beneficial if people use it as intended. The BRCH
will complement and serve as a key enabler to other investments
Further guidance (current and future) in sustainable transport and active travel
proposals, particularly cycling infrastructure schemes and liveable
☐ No impact Enhancing
neighbourhoods. The project aims and objectives highlighted in this
actions
document align with City Region Sustainable Transport Settlement
(CRSTS) investment objectives and will contribute to a sustained
increase in active travel modes and enable other legacy beneficial
outcomes in the medium to long term.
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
Page 143
The current site is a pre-1970’s tip and there are ground gases
escaping. New buildings will be designed to distribute ground gases
to eliminate danger to health for occupants.
The site currently is open space, the proposed development plan
entails a 1km wide 6m tarmac closed loop cycling circuit, a modular 2
story building with several shipping containers for storage, a food
concession space, car parking, fencing, flood risk attenuation ponds
and landscaping.These will have an adverse impact on the site,
Adverse however with an energy management plan, ponds, and rills for
impacts holding water, green roofs, and careful consideration of materials, the
scheme will reduce this impact where possible.
Although the track itself will be tarmac, the intended use is for
cycling, so there should be little contamination to the water run off as
there very few vehicles are intended to use it, the only vehicles
proposed are for periodic grounds maintenance, grass cutting and
sweeping.
Construction works and the use of materials.

Consideration of materials used across the site for buildings and
pathways is a priority, there is an energy management and
decarbonisation plan in development as part of the OBC, FBC and for
the Planning Application; this has been commented on by our
Sustainability Team within BCC to inform the development.
Opportunities to reduce embodied carbon in the materials used for
construction will be considered.

New buildings will be designed to distribute ground gases to eliminate
danger to health for occupants.

The use of solar and air or ground source heating will be considered
as well as potential green roof elements where applicable and the
buildings will assume high BREAM standards as a requirement.
Mitigating
The SP is commissioned to undertake a Transport Statement which
actions
will demonstrate that the impact of the proposed development on
the transport network will be acceptable in planning terms, and
specifically consider the appropriateness of parking and site access, as
well as the ability to access the site by sustainable modes of travel. A
Walking-Cycling-Horseriding report will be authored to consider
accessibility by these modes in particular.

In addition, BCC will develop a Travel Plan for the site which will
include a suite of measures designed to enhance the transport-
sustainability of the site and will set out both physical measures (e.g.
cycle parking and EV parking) and non-physical measures (e.g. car
sharing, travel information) which will be in place once the site is
operational.

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Page 144
Nature, Wildlife and habitat retention or creation is vital to this
development as it will be built on an area of important open space.

As a former tip, the land at some point was capped with topsoil and
left undisturbed, it is now overgrown with pitting and pooling in parts
of the site. There is poor drainage and at the western end reports of
flooding in heavy rains attracting rats and other vermin. Parts of the
site are overgrown with brambles and there are areas that contain
Japanese Knotweed and Giant Hogweed has also been mentioned
anecdotally alongside the Barracks Rhyne which is currently
inaccessible. Whilst these parts of the site provide habitats for wildlife
there is little ability to enjoy the space.

There is an opportunity to enhance the landscape by enhanced
ENV2 Ecological recovery: planting and management. The addition of reeds and other aquatic
Wildlife and habitats plants in the ponds and rills will benefit and increase diversity and
BCC has committed to 30% provide environments for insects, pond life and animals.
of its land being managed
for nature and to halve its Benefits
The Water Vole Mitigation Handbook indicates that impacts on water
use of pesticides by 2030. vole burrows may avoided by establishing a buffer zone around a
watercourse. The size of the buffer zone will be dependent on the
Consider how your proposal nature of the works and the likely extent of burrows but is likely to be
can support increased space in the region of 3–5m from the toe of bank. Provided intrusive works,
for nature, reduced use of such as the proposed walking route you mention below, which can be
pesticides, reduce pollution kept more than this distance and it is not anticipated that there will
to waterways, and reduce be any impact on water voles.
consumption of products
that undermine ecosystems Careful consideration has been given to retaining as many trees on
around the world. site as possible. Where trees are removed for the development, there
will be new trees planted on the site where safely possible providing
If your proposal will directly shade and green corridors for wildlife and keeping much tree canopy
lead to a reduction in habitat as possible.
within Bristol, then consider
how your proposed BNG and other figures will be added to this document as they
mitigation can lead to a become available. However, there will be an overall BNG of at least
biodiversity net gain. Be sure 10% in accordance with the national requirement.
to refer to quantifiable There will be a new dog walking path between the rhyne and the
changes wherever possible. northern treeline around the perimeter of the site, the Japanese
Knotweed and Giant Hogweed will be removed under an invasive
Further guidance species management plan by BCC Parks.
☐ No impact
The intended use for the site is for cycle training, however there is
also an opportunity to increase the biodiversity on site by considered
planting, reeds and aquatic plants in the ponds and rills. Creation of
habitats for insects, reptiles, birds, and small mammals will be part of
Enhancing
the BNG mitigation.
actions

The site will also provide educational activities and opportunities for
children and adults to learn about the creatures that inhabit the
different spaces for example pond dipping, creation of bat and bird
boxes and reptile habitats.

There will be new habitats created with plants and wildflowers in
spaces and planters all with the purpose of attracting pollinators and
other insects.
Page 145
There will be a biodiversity and landscape management plan created
and implemented to address retaining and enhancing biodiversity as
the new plants, shrubs and trees grow to maturity.

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
There are several hedges that have been planted across the site from
north to south, a line of trees and dense scrub that runs west to east
and a line of mature trees bordering the southern edge, most of
which will be retained but some will need to be removed and re-
provided on other parts of the site as part of landscaping.
Adverse
impacts
This will be addressed through an Arboricultural Impact Assessment
which will accompany the planning application. The BNG report will
demonstrate how there will be a 10% gain achieved for
trees/hedgerows.

The Water Vole Mitigation Handbook indicates that impacts on water
vole burrows may avoided by establishing a buffer zone around a
watercourse. The size of the buffer zone will be dependent on the
nature of the works and the likely extent of burrows but is likely to be
Mitigating in the region of 3–5m from the top of bank. Provided intrusive works,
actions such as the proposed walking route can be kept more than this
distance the SP ecologist does not anticipate any impact on water
voles.

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years

Reduce, repair, recycle are key things for the Regional Cycling Centre
ENV3 A cleaner, low-waste to consider and manage. Overall, the team are very waste and
city: Consumption of resource conscious.
resources and generation of
waste Benefits There is thought that goes into all the products that are used both in
the office and the workshop.

Consider what resources will
be used as a result of the The current centre has 2x 240L recycling bins and 1x general waste
proposal, how they can be bins that get emptied fortnightly.
minimised or swapped for The centre doesn’t currently use disposable cups for hot drinks sales,
less impactful ones, where instead ceramic mugs are used as they can be washed and reused.
they will be sourced from, The centre doesn’t sell bottled water on principle, staff and
and what will happen to any customers are encouraged to bring reuseable water containers that
Enhancing
waste generated we fill from the tap for free. The BRCH will have water points on the
actions
site to encourage people to fill their own drinking containers.
The centre sells small tetra pack orange and apple juice for children-
these tetra packs can be recycled.
The centre doesn’t sell sugary drinks or snacks on principle either.
Office waste is generally cardboard packaging and plastics which are
all recycled.

Page 146
Food waste is minimal as nothing other than tea, coffee and juice is
Further guidance sold. Tea bags and apple cores, orange peel from lunches goes into
our compost bin for use for planting.
☐ No impact Soft plastics such as bags and wrapping are collected and recycled by
one of the team.
Glass is also recycled by one of the team.
Regular servicing of all cycles and machinery helps to keep them in
use for as long as possible.
Our old cotton t shirts used for uniform get washed and cut into
clean rags for use in the workshop once they have reached the end of
their wearable life.

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
Rubber tyres and inner tubes are an issue. We have signed up to a
recycling scheme from one of the tyre suppliers and send our tyres
and inner tubes back to them for recycling/repurposing.

Oils and oily rags – currently go into general waste.

Lubricants – grease and propellant light oils are used in cycle
maintenance.
Adverse
impacts Brake blocks in some cycles are ceramic, other brakes are hydraulic.
Many however are rubber- these get worn down and the metal parts
get recycled, the rubber and ceramics go into general waste.

Construction waste.

Brake cables, broken metal parts – any metal that can be recycled is
collected by a local scrap metal person. A small box 45cm x 75 cm
x75cm is the usual volume produced in 3 months unless cycle frames
or wheels are scrapped.

Parts that can be reused when cycles are no longer useable are saved
and go into our parts bank.

Sourcing products that give thought to sustainability is something to
be continued.
Mitigating
actions Light oils and lubricants – care should be given around propellants
used and those less damaging to the environment or propellant free
products used instead.

Rubber tyres and inner tubes are an issue. We have signed up to a
recycling scheme from one of the tyre suppliers and send our tyres
and inner tubes back to them for recycling/repurposing.

Ensure construction teams have a waste management plan in place to
follow the waste hierarchy.

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Page 147
Designing buildings and spaces, including surface water drainage
features, will help to address some of these issues of climate
resilience.
Benefits
The use of solar and air or ground source heating will be considered
as well as potential green roof elements where applicable and the
buildings will assume high BREAM standards as a requirement.
Designing the buildings to take advantage of natural light, using
movement activated LED’s for lighting, thinking about heat
management both in summer and winter will all be part of the
architectural design.
Retention of as much of the tree canopy and replanting where
necessary.
Enhancing Provide shelter from wind, rain and sun by siting shelters and
ENV4 Climate resilience: actions canopies across the site.
Bristol’s resilience to the -Provide sustainable drainage features to capture and attenuate
effects of climate change rainfall runoff, incorporate additional capacity into the design as
resilience to the predicted effects of climate change. Plan exceedance
Bristol’s climate is already flow routes in very extreme events to avoid buildings and other
changing, and increasingly vulnerable assets.
frequent instances of
extreme weather will Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
become more likely over The use of tarmac and other materials that will become hot in the
time. summer can’t really be avoided, however will be accompanied by
Adverse extensive landscaping which will provide shading and cooling.
impacts
Consider how the proposal
will perform during periods
of extreme weather
(particularly heat and Choosing coloured surfaces that will reduce glare will also be
flooding). important.
Designing the buildings to take advantage of natural light , using
Consider if the proposal will movement activated LED’s for lighting, thinking about heat
management both in summer and winter will all be part of the
reduce or increase risk to
architectural design.
people and assets during
extreme weather events. Retention of as much of the tree canopy and replanting where
necessary.
Provide shelter from wind, rain and sun by siting shelters and
Further guidance
canopies across the site.
☐ No impact
Mitigating Consideration of materials used across the site for buildings and
actions pathways is a priority, there is an energy management and
decarbonisation brief in development as part of the OBC, FBC and for
the Planning Application; this has been commented on by our
Sustainability Team within BCC to inform the development.

The use of solar and air or ground source heating will be considered
as well as potential green roof elements where applicable and the
buildings assume high BREAM standards as a requirement.
A flood plan will be written for this site.
Utilise the ‘Keep Bristol Cool’ mapping tool and EA flood map to assist
in mitigation planning measures.

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Page 148
The BRCH will be rejuvenating an old, contaminated landfill site.
Cycling scores quite well in terms of minimal pollution to air water
Benefits and land.

Statutory duty: The mitigations to the land contamination will be beneficial in many
Prevention of Pollution to respects by either compacting the land or covering the land with a
Enhancing
air, water, or land actions physical barrier or membrane across the entire site.
Clean materials will be brought in, again enhancing the land.

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
Consider how the proposal Water runoff from the tarmac track and the car park is inevitable.
will change the likelihood of Runoff will be managed and attenuated using sustainable drainage
Adverse
pollution occurring to air, impacts features such as ponds and rills, which will be embedded within the
water, or land and what design.
steps will be taken to
prevent pollution occurring. Although the track itself will be tarmac, the intended use is for
cycling, so there should be little contamination to the water run off as
there will be very few motorised vehicles using it, including periodic
grounds maintenance, grass cutting and sweeping.
Mitigating
There are rills and attenuation ponds planned as part of the
Further guidance actions
management of water run off which can be planted and used to
☐ No impact increase the biodiversity. Our BCC flood risk team were consulted
prior to the Covid pandemic, and this work will be revisited and a
refreshed repot produced as part of OBC/FBC and Planning

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Step 3: Action Plan
Use this section summarise and assign responsibility for any actions you have identified to improve data, enhance
beneficial, or mitigate negative impacts. Actions identified in section two can be grouped together if named
responsibility is under the same person.
This action plan should be updated at each stage of the project. Please be aware that the Sustainable City and
Climate Change Service may use this action plan as an audit checklist during the project’s implementation or
operation.
Enhancing / mitigating action required Responsible Officer Timescale
ENV1- Carbon Neutral - values and estimates for emissions source SPI April 2025
table
ENV2 -Ecological Recovery- Activities and measures SPI April 2025
ENV3- A cleaner low waste city-Activities and measures BCC BRCH Team April 2025
ENV4- Climate resilience- Activities and measures SPI April 2025
Update this document BCC BRCH Team April 2025

Step 4: Review
The Sustainable City and Climate Change Service need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your
impact assessment. Assessments should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for
decision-makers on the environmental impact of the proposal.

Page 149
Please seek feedback and review by emailing environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk before final submission of
your decision pathway documentation1.
Where impacts identified in this assessment are deemed significant, they will be summarised here by the Sustainable
City and Climate Change Service and must be included in the ‘evidence base’ section of the decision pathway cover
sheet.

Summary of significant beneficial impacts and opportunities to support the Climate, Ecological and Corporate
Strategies (ENV1,2,3,4):
BCC’s Environmental Impact Assessment has determined significant beneficial impacts from the proposal – The
existence of a cycling centre is important to encourage modal travel shift, the project will also improve local cycle
routes. Opportunity for bio-diversity net gain (BNG) through planting, greens roofs, SUDS, ponds. Opportunity for
new buildings to be more energy efficient than current with consideration to green energy technology solutions in
build and full energy management plan in place.
Summary of significant adverse impacts and how they can be mitigated:
BCC’s Environmental Impact Assessment has determined significant negative impacts from the proposal –
Construction works will have impacts including carbon, material use and waste generation. Risk to existing bio-
diversity on site which will be mitigated through BNG and close work with BCC ecology officers.

Environmental Performance Team Reviewer: Submitting author:
Nicola Hares – Environmental Performance Officer Adam Crowther

Date: 19/08/2024 Date: 22/08/24

1
Review by the Sustainable City and Climate Change Service confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers
to consider the likely environmental impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
Page 150
Agenda Item 10

Committee Report

PURPOSE: Final Decision Report

KEY OR NON-KEY DECISION: Key decision over £500k spend/save & impacts more than 2 wards

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 12 September 2024

TITLE: Workplace Parking Levy
Ward(s): All wards

Officer presenting the report: Adam Crowther Job title: Head of City Transport

Committee Chair: Councillor Ed Plowden
Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: Committee Chair

Purpose of Report: This report sets out the current thinking around how a Workplace Parking Levy would
work and what it would need to deliver it and seeks approval to allocate funding for development of the
business case for the scheme.

Evidence Base / Options to consider:

Background:

1. The aim of a Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) scheme is to tackle congestion by placing a charge upon
the use of commuter workplace parking places (WPPs). The parking places may have been free of
charge to the employees for some time previously. The aim is also to encourage employers to
manage the number of free workplace parking places that they provide, whilst promoting the use of
sustainable transport. The introduction of a WPL has other benefits associated with the reduction in
the use of the car and increase in the use of alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public
transport e.g., improvements to health and the environment.

2. The details of the potential WPL scheme requires further work but essentially workplaces with
parking places would face an annual charge per parking place and the employer would decide
whether to pass that compulsory charge onto the employee or not. The parking charges earned
from the scheme provide local authorities with a ring-fenced source of revenue to fund Local
Transport Plan policies and objectives (and the associated transport schemes such as improved bus
services). Specifically, the Transport Act 2000 Road User Charging and Workplace Parking Levy

1
Version January 2024 Page 151
OFFICIAL
Explanatory Note, states: “The Act enables local traffic authorities outside London to introduce road
user charging and workplace parking levies to help tackle congestion and use the revenue to directly
or indirectly facilitate local transport policy goals of the licensing authority.”

3. A workplace parking levy study was first carried out by Atkins in 2011 to examine the options for
implementing a charge to fund transport projects such as metrobus. The scheme was not taken
forward at the time.

4. Subsequently there have been discussions regarding a WPL, but no conclusions have been reached
as to whether to take forward a WPL scheme. The Green Party proposed a full council budget
amendment that was passed to provide funding for an updated WPL report to examine the options
and how a scheme might be delivered. Nottingham City Council (NCC) were commissioned to carry
out that report (the Feasibility Study) to advise on how a scheme could be delivered and over what
time frame, should the council decide to proceed. The outcomes from that study are discussed in
this report and the whole report is attached in Appendix A.

5. In November 2021 Full Council passed a resolution to summarise this report and bring it before Full
Council, but this did not happen
(https://democracy.bristol.gov.uk/documents/s67446/Minutes%20Public%20Pack%2009112021%2
0Full%20Council%206pm.pdf).

6. Subsequently the Green Party manifesto contained a commitment to implement a WPL.

Challenges:

1. Increasing congestion
2. Poor air quality
3. Climate and Ecological Emergency declared
4. Funding shortfall for sustainable transport projects

Possible Outcomes / Comparative Position at Nottingham:
1. Nottingham’s WPL has been operational since 2012 and £83 million revenue has been generated.
2. A 5.79% reduction in average total transport emissions in Nottingham is reported since 2012.
3. Nottingham saw a reduction in workplace parking of around 16% when the WPL was introduced
(Page28-Appendix A).
4. Nottingham’s annual levy charge is currently £550.
5. Bristol has a different layout and business distribution to Nottingham, so a different approach is
proposed. Rather than a lower city-wide charge a higher, smaller central core area scheme is an
option for Bristol.
6. A central charging zone priced at around £20 per week could generate around £8-10m per year
7. For comparison purposes of annual transport costs in Bristol, multi-storey car parks owned by Bristol
City Council have annual season tickets ranging from £2,808-£3,744 (£54-72 per week).
8. The cost of an annual First Bus Bristol Zone travel pass is £841 (£16 per week).
9. The central area is well served from all directions by public transport, P&Rs and walking and cycling
routes ensuring that alternative options are available for those using the WPPs.

Solutions:
7. A decision of where to go next with a WPL and an appreciation of the amount of work, time and

2
Version January 2024 Page 152
OFFICIAL
expense is needed. To get to the next stage (as described in the Appendix A report) is a complicated,
detailed process. The NCC report describes the process that Bristol would need to go through to
implement a WPL for the city as below:

• Stage One: Scheme Development and Outline Business Case (OBC)
• Stage Two: Public Consultation, Final Business Case (FBC) and Scheme Approval (the FBC will be
submitted to the Secretary of State for Transport for their approval to progress to Stage Three)
• Stage Three: Implementation and Operation

8. Extracting key information from that report and reaching a decision as to what to do next is the
basis of this committee report. Below is some key information to help make that decision:
1. As described in the report, Stage One is an Outline Business Case and the work to do this would take
approximately a year. It could cost up to £1m but this will depend on the size and type of scheme so
costs could be less. Further breakdown of this work is in Appendix G.
2. The funds from a WPL could be used to support delivery of sustainable transport projects such as
the Strategic Corridors package or Mass Transit plans which would also assist with asset
maintenance across the city. It could also be used to fund ongoing public transport services through
contracts or subsidies. This will enable Bristol City Council to achieve the vision and targets outlined
in the One City Plan and JLTP4 and is fundamental to business case scheme approval. More detail
would be provided on proposed schemes before submission to the Secretary of State.
3. Stage One will develop the principles of the scheme such as the charging structure, exact locations,
costs and exemptions. Also developing further what transport schemes the generated revenue will
be used for.
4. At the end of Stage One is a potential holding point for a final decision to either stop any further
scheme development, delay scheme development, undertake further works to enhance the OBC or
approve and proceed to Stage Two and a public consultation.
5. The total estimated cost and time to implement a WPL (Stage 1-3) would be three years and around
£2million.
6. Stage 2, in summary, would involve public consultation, the WPL approval processes and the
working systems.
7. Stage 3, simplified, would involve recruiting and training staff, confirming operational models,
financial systems, employer engagement and purchasing equipment.
8. The staff/resource requirements are suggested to be 10 internal BCC roles (not all full time on the
project) and 3 or 4 external consultants/advisory specialists. Nottingham City Council can support
with some of the work. An experienced internal project manager is required. Resource can be drawn
from our Strategic Partners, and this could include some or all of the internal roles.

Officer Recommendations:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity

1. Approve, subject to suitable resource being available, so as not to delay the implementation of the
CRSTS programme or other key transport programmes, the progression to Stage One Development
and Outline Business Case (OBC) at a cost of up to £1m. Approve testing options for a WPL and the
potential benefits and issues those options would create to enable a more informed decision to be
taken as to whether to proceed to FBC and potential subsequent delivery of a WPL.
2. Stage One Development and OBC costs to be funded through CAZ funding to be repaid from
subsequent income generated from the scheme.

3
Version January 2024 Page 153
OFFICIAL
Contractual:

3. Authorises the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration in consultation with Committee Chair
for Transport and Connectivity to procure/extend/vary and award the contract(s) necessary for the
implementation of Stage 1 of the WPL, in-line with the procurement routes and maximum budget
envelopes outlined in this report, noting the associated Legal commentaries.
4. Authorises the Exec Director for Growth and Regeneration to invoke any subsequent
extensions/variations specifically defined in the contract(s) being awarded, up to the maximum
budget envelope outlined in this report.

Corporate Strategy alignment:

1. Putting a WPL in place in Bristol allows us to invest in a transport system that connects people
sustainably. It will enable us to provide a system that connects people to jobs through better
investment where it is needed such as an improved public transport system.
2. It supports inclusive Good Growth through a more managed car parking system.
3. It works towards tackling the urgency of climate and ecological emergencies declared in the city and
efforts to promote carbon neutrality by reducing the numbers of cars in the city and improving
public transport options.

City Benefits:

1. The introduction of a WPL has benefits associated with the reduction in the use of the car and
increase in the use of alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public transport. These include
improvements to people’s health and the environment.
2. There is likely to be a reduction in the amount of carbon dioxide due to the reduction in the number
of cars/trips into the city centre. . This would also improve air quality due to a lowering of emissions
and particulates and may include other health benefits such as a reduction in traffic noise.
3. There would also be a reduction in congestion and the other associated negative impacts, which
damage our economy and are a burden on businesses that need to move people and goods around
the City. The business community will be a key stakeholder throughout the process.
4.
5. More sustainable transport options would become available due to the extra funds from the
introduction of the Levy. This would benefit younger people who have more limited car access and
lower car use but make better use of buses, trains and bicycles. Younger people rely on public
transport to access education, training, employment and recreational opportunities. From the age
of 16 onwards the bus becomes an important tool in enabling young people to access employment
and training. Similarly, women have more limited car use but are more likely to be a carer or single
parents so this proposal may have an impact on them. Young people, older people and disabled
people are more likely to use the bus service than women and other equality groups. Lack of
adequate public transport creates barriers to accessing employment and educational opportunities.
Full Equalities impacts will be undertaken, including any “downsides” that need to be mitigated,
including for disabled people who may be reliant on private cars.

Consultation Details: When and where has / will this proposal be discussed? e.g. partner consultation,
member consultation, public consultation. Add further details in the evidence base or appendix F if

4
Version January 2024 Page 154
OFFICIAL
required.

1. The proposal has/will be discussed at the following:
a. Full council debate
b. Golden Motion
c. Budget amendment
2. A workplace parking levy is referenced in and consulted on as part of the Joint Local Transport Plan
4 and Bristol Transport Strategy
3. The Feasibility Study discusses where consultation should be undertaken when developing the WPL.
This includes the following:
a. As part of Stage One which includes the scheme development, developing datasets on
employers and a set of scheme principles. The scheme principles will then be a key
component of the Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan which will
be about stakeholder engagement, especially with the city centre business community, in
advance of the public consultation workstream in Stage Two. The Plan will be used to discuss
and gain an understanding of the future transport infrastructure that medium and large
employers would like to see introduced.
b. Stage Two of the WPL Route Map will focus on preparing the relevant documentation,
processes, procedures and activities to undertake a formal public consultation. This will need
to include creating and managing documentation (leaflets, posters, letters, etc.) and
communication platforms (social media, websites, phoneline, email inboxes, etc. The public
consultation programme will require a significant amount of additional resources to
undertake events and activities, engaging with interested parties and stakeholders through
both proactive and reactive communications. The consultation will include the processing,
categorisation and management of all responses, as well as any additional data collection,
analysis and compilation of reports that will form a necessary part of the submission to the
Secretary of State for Transport for approval. The result of the work detailed above will
culminate in the production of a suite of public consultation documents, setting out Bristol
City Council’s response to the public consultation and informing the production of the FBC.
The resulting FBC will be the justification for Bristol City Council’s WPL scheme, and at this
point, the scheme will be based upon robust and tested evidence, which has met or
exceeded the legislative requirements addressed in the Red Tape Challenge and has
undergone significant and sustained local, regional and national scrutiny.
c. Further information on the Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan
starts on page 38 of the Feasibility Study report.
d. The Route Map in Appendix C of the Feasibility report gives a good overview of where the
elements of consultation fit in in the process
4. Appendix G in the feasibility report gives an overview of the stakeholders in a Stakeholder radar.
Background Documents: Appendix A: Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol-Final Draft

Revenue Cost £1m Source of Revenue Clean Air Zone
Funding
Capital Cost Source of Capital Funding N/A
One off cost ☒ Ongoing cost ☐ Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving? Choose an item.
OR Income generation proposal ☒

5
Version January 2024 Page 155
OFFICIAL
Professional comments section:
1. Finance Advice: The report is setting out the initial plans and draft assumption around the potential
development and delivery of a Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) in Bristol.

The scheme would tackle environmental, and transport related challenges facing Bristol, generating funds
to reinvest and promote more sustainable transport that fit the Local Transport Plan policies and
objectives.

A feasibility study was conducted in November 2021 on how a scheme could be delivered in Bristol which
this report refers to, setting out the key stages and costs associated.

This paper seeks to approve the initial stage one opening business case development, at a cost of £1m with
a timeframe of one year. This work will cover initial scheme development, modelling, and data collection.
Clear Air Zone (CAZ) has been suggested to fund this stage, repayable from the income WPL generates, but
the council should investigate all funding options including grants and contributions from providers.

Further stages, two and three, would not be committed until stage one is fully completed, approved and
funding identified, further decision would be required to progress from stage 1.

If implemented it is expected that the ongoing running costs of the scheme are low at around 5% of the
potential income generated, costing around £0.5m per annum and funded from the income generated.

There is a significant amount of work to do to deliver the WPL scheme and several stages of approval to
achieve, income and costings need firming up and reviewed by finance at each stage to minimise any
financial risks.

Finance Business Partner: Kevin Jay, Finance Manager – Growth and Regeneration 14 August 2024.
2. Legal Advice:
Legal Team Leader:
The Transport Act 2000 permits the imposition of a Workplace Parking Levy to cover any part of the area of
the Council making the scheme and requires that a scheme must be in support of the relevant local
transport plan.

Where any proposals are to be the subject of a consultation exercise, the consultation must be carried out
at a formative stage in the process, must give sufficient detail of the reasons for each proposal (so as to
enable intelligent consideration of what is being proposed) and must allow sufficient time for any
consultees to consider the proposals and respond to them. Any consultation response received must be
conscientiously taken into account in finalising the decision. There must also be clear evidence that the
decision maker has actively considered all the responses received, or at least a summary of them, before
the decision (s) are made.
Joanne Mansfield, Team Manager Legal Services 23 August 2024.
3. Implications on IT: I can see no implications on IT regarding this activity.
IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead Enterprise Architect 14 August 2024

4. HR Advice: At this stage there are no implications for the workforce, but should a scheme be adopted
there may be additional resource requirements to administer it.

6
Version January 2024 Page 156
OFFICIAL
HR Partner: Celia Williams, HR Business Partner (Growth and Regeneration) 13 August 2024

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal YES

Feasibility Study Report

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment YES

Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment YES

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

7
Version January 2024 Page 157
OFFICIAL
Feasibility Study Report for a WPL
Scheme in Bristol

Submission by Nottingham City Council on behalf of
Bristol City Council

Page 158
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |0
Table of Contents
Table of Contents ...................................................................................................................1
1.0 Foreword ...........................................................................................................................3
2.0 Executive Summary .........................................................................................................4
3.0 Background ......................................................................................................................5
4.0 Methodology .....................................................................................................................8
5.0 Deliverables ....................................................................................................................10
5.1 Key Stages and Activities..........................................................................................10
5.1.1 (WS1.0) Stage One: Scheme Development – Outline Business Case (OBC) ......11
5.1.2 (PM1.0) Stage One Project Management – Outputs .............................................15
5.1.3 (WS2.0) Stage Two: Public Consultation and Approval ........................................16
5.1.4 (PM2.0) Project Management – Outputs ...............................................................18
5.1.5 (WS3.0) Stage Three: Implementation and Operation ..........................................19
5.1.6 (PM3.0) Project Management – Outputs ...............................................................21
5.2 Milestones and External Dependencies ...................................................................23
5.3 Data Analysis and Quality Assurance of the Atkins Study ....................................26
5.3.1 Description of Methodology ...................................................................................26
5.3.2 Analysis/Critique ....................................................................................................27
5.3.3 Estimate on Potential Income ................................................................................29
5.4 Governance and Project Team Structure.................................................................32
5.4.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................32
5.4.2 Governance ...........................................................................................................32
5.4.3 Governance Team Structure .................................................................................33
5.4.4 WPL Project Team.................................................................................................33
5.4.5 Internal (Bristol City Council) WPL Project Team Structure ..................................34
5.4.6 External (non-Bristol City Council) Project Team Structure ...................................36
5.5 Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan ............................38
5.5.1 Stakeholder Management Strategy .......................................................................38
5.5.2 Communications Plan ............................................................................................42
5.5.3 Communications Responsibilities ..........................................................................45
5.6 Risk Analysis for Bristol City Council’s Readiness to Progress Ahead of Stage
One………………………………………………………………………………………………...47
5.6.1 Introduction to Project Risk Management ..............................................................47
5.6.2 What is Project Risk Management?.......................................................................47
5.6.3 Issue Management versus Risk Management.......................................................47
5.6.4 Opportunities and Threats .....................................................................................48
5.6.5 Risk Considerations in the Proposal and Approval Phase ....................................48

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page 159 Page |1
5.6.6 Project Risk Management Process........................................................................48
5.6.7 Methodology ..........................................................................................................48
5.6.8 Summary of Risk Analysis .....................................................................................50
6.0 Conclusion and Recommendations for Action ...........................................................52
7.0 Appendices.....................................................................................................................54
7.1 Appendix A: Bristol Key Terms Glossary ................................................................54
7.2 Appendix B: WPL Glossary .......................................................................................56
7.3 Appendix C: WPL Route Map ....................................................................................58
7.4 Appendix D: Milestones and Dependencies Timeline ............................................59
7.5 Appendix E: Timeline for a Bristol WPL Scheme ....................................................60
7.6 Appendix F: Governance and Project Team Structure ...........................................61
7.8 Appendix G: Stakeholder Radar ...............................................................................62
7.9 Appendix H: 2X2 Power/Influence by Interest in WPL Matrix ................................63
7.10 Appendix I: Risk Register ........................................................................................64
7.11 Appendix J: Recommendations..............................................................................72

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page 160 Page |2
1.0 Foreword

In March 2021, Nottingham City Council were asked by Bristol City Council to conduct
a Feasibility Study to assess their readiness to develop a Workplace Parking Levy
(WPL) scheme. I am pleased to offer this Feasibility Study Report as the result of that
agreement. Inside you will find a tailor-made WPL Route Map and a wealth of guidance
on implementing a cost effective, timely and low risk WPL scheme in Bristol.
Climate change is playing an ever-increasing part in decision making across society
and nowhere more so than in local government, with around 230 local authorities
declaring a climate crisis. Consequently, air quality and congestion are also coming
under greater public scrutiny and we are pleased that more councils across the UK
are considering implementing a WPL, as it is a proven way of constraining congestion
growth and providing the financial resources for a step change in sustainable
transport.
Bristol City Council have already shown strong leadership on sustainability with their
One City Plan and I am excited by the proposals the plan sets out, particularly in the
field of transport. Following the production of this Feasibility Study Report, I am sure
that a WPL would be a major milestone on Bristol City Council’s journey towards their
goal of ensuring that Bristol is a well-connected city with transport that is efficient,
sustainable and inclusive by 2050.
As the only UK local authority to have introduced a WPL, Nottingham City Council is
uniquely placed to share our skills and experience on WPL scheme development and
implementation. We are always keen to work with other local authorities, particularly
when it comes to carbon reduction projects, and I would be delighted to have the
opportunity to expand on how we can provide assistance throughout the process if
Bristol City Council decide to progress further along the WPL Route Map.
For now though, I hope you enjoy reading the report and that it provides further insight
into how Bristol City Council can introduce a WPL in the shortest possible time frame,
cost effectively and at the lowest possible risk.

Jason Gooding
Head of Parking, Fleet and Transport Operations
Nottingham City Council

Page 161
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |3
2.0 Executive Summary

The following Feasibility Study Report is submitted as non-statutory guidance on the
process for developing and seeking approval for implementing a WPL scheme in
Bristol city centre. The report refers to statutory guidance as set out in the Transport
Act 2000, which is the guiding primary legislation for congestion charging schemes.
The report will reduce risk associated with any WPL development by suggesting areas
where Bristol City Council should look to replicate Nottingham City Council’s WPL and
where there is scope to define unique, specific elements in line with local objectives
and conditions.
The implementation of the WPL Route Map (Appendix C) will deliver key stages of the
WPL scheme development process in a structured, timely manner which will result in
an operational WPL in Bristol at the lowest cost and risk, while maintaining standards.
Appendix J contains a list of recommendations with suggested actions that will further
aid Bristol City Council in its progression towards a WPL. These recommendations
have been formulated as part of an in-depth programme of work, including
engagement and workshops held with senior officers from Bristol City Council.
The following key deliverables have been produced as part of this Feasibility Study:
1. A WPL Route Map that outlines the key stages and activities required to
achieve the target “go live” date.
2. Specialist advice and recommendations resulting from a thorough review of the
Atkins Study
3. A WPL Governance and Project Team Structure that would assist Bristol City
Council’s preparation for the delivery of the WPL Route Map
4. A Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan
5. A Risk Register that assesses Bristol City Council’s readiness for the delivery
of the WPL Route Map
There are an extensive amount of studies and supporting information available (Bus
Back Better, ICTF, JLTP 4, CAZ, One City Plan etc.) to Bristol City Council which will
all contribute to the development of a robust WPL Business Case. These pieces of
work have been completed or are close to completion.
The work undertaken evidences that Bristol City Council has an ambitious vision of
what it would like to achieve and a clear strategy that outlines the plans to deliver this.
Following the guidance within this report could achieve a WPL scheme “go live” date
of October 2024.
It is the belief of Nottingham City Council that Bristol City Council is well positioned to
progress to the delivery of Stage One of the WPL Route Map.

Page 162
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |4
3.0 Background

The following chapter provides a brief overview of why Bristol City Council are
considering a WPL scheme, what a WPL is and a case study of the performance to
date of Nottingham’s WPL.
Bristol
Bristol City Council, under the leadership of the elected Mayor, has an ambitious One
City Plan which is built around six core themes, all of which are underpinned by the
UN Sustainable Development Goals.
A key theme of the One City Plan is transport, where the vision is to ensure that “By
2050, everyone will be well-connected with digital services and transport that is
efficient, sustainable and inclusive; supporting vibrant local neighbourhoods and a
thriving city centre.”1
Bristol Labour’s most recent manifesto made some major pledges linked to transport
and air quality:

• “Deliver a mass transit system: This will be in the form of both an underground
and an overground – as well as expanding and improving our existing
infrastructure – connecting people to one another, jobs, and opportunity”
• “Better buses: Double the frequency and improve the reliability of existing bus
journeys through the Bus Deal and increase the number of routes so more
areas are served.”2
The manifesto also states:

• “We want to connect people to jobs, opportunity, and leisure. Over the last five
years, we’ve delivered a Clean Air Zone, a fleet of bio-gas buses, and laid
foundations for a mass transit system. With your support, we will deliver the
mass transit system, make our streets safer, and put walking and cycling as the
forefront of our transport policy”
• “Under a Labour council, Bristol will also provide free travel for apprentices and
students under-25”
• “Expand the number of Park and Ride sites”
• “Deliver a Clean Air Zone that charges non-compliant vehicles in the centre of
town”
• “Roll out at least two Liveable Neighbourhood pilots – with a view to expanding
it”
• “Deliver a London-style one-touch integrated ticketing system so that your ticket
can be used across different types of public transport”

1 One City Plan 2020 - link
2 Labour Bristol – 2021 Manifesto - link

Page 163
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |5
• “Provide more on-street bike hangers throughout the city”2
The prevailing issues of poor air quality and congestion that are faced by most core
cities apply to Bristol too and they are a significant threat, not only to the health of
Bristol’s citizens and visitors but also to the vibrancy of the local economy. Research
conducted by analysts INRIX showed that Bristol was the UK’s third worst city for
congestion with a commuter losing on average 103 hours in queues last year.3 Bristol
City Council have therefore set themselves the target of becoming carbon neutral by
2025 and for the city of Bristol to be carbon neutral by 2030.4

Bristol City Council will be implementing a CAZ in summer 2022 in order to bring air
pollution levels across Bristol city centre in line with national targets set by central
government. Over the past ten years, the city of Bristol has seen a 4.6% reduction in
carbon dioxide emissions released through road transport, compared to a core city
average of 5.28%;5 this shows that additional measures are required to tackle the
levels of emissions across the city and to improve air quality at pace.

Bristol’s JLPT4 sets out a vision of high quality, sustainable public transport
infrastructure and the proposed JLTP5 will look to build on that progress. For JLTP5
to be viable, it is important to identify measures that could deliver a direct and reliable
local funding stream to support these aspirations, which could also be used as match
funding to generate further significant inward investment. One viable funding stream
to deliver this vision is a WPL scheme.
Workplace Parking Levy
The Transport Act 2000 (as amended) contains the legal authority to introduce a WPL
scheme and one of the fundamental requirements is that revenue raised by a WPL is
ring-fenced for local transport policies.6
Specifically, the Transport Act 2000 Road User Charging and Workplace Parking Levy
Explanatory Note, states:
“The Act enables local traffic authorities outside London to introduce road user
charging and workplace parking levies to help tackle congestion and use the
revenue to directly or indirectly facilitate local transport policy goals of the
licensing authority.”

Not all elements of WPL schemes are determined in detail by the Transport Act 2000.
There is substantial scope for local decision making on how a WPL can operate, which

3 Bristol Post – Bristol ranked in UK’s bottom three for traffic jams - link
4 Bristol City Council – Mayor’s Climate Emergency Action Plan 2019 - link; Bristol One City – One City Climate

Strategy - link
5 UK local authority and regional carbon dioxide emissions national statistics, Department for Business, Energy

and Industrial Strategy - link
6 Transport Act 2000, Section 179 - link

Page 164
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |6
is why there is a need for a clear and comprehensive approach to scheme delivery,
as outlined in this report.
Case Study - Nottingham
Nottingham City Council is the only local authority in the UK to have implemented and
operated a WPL scheme. Nottingham’s WPL has been operational since 2012 and
some of its achievements are listed below:

• Over £83 million direct revenue generated
• Levered in an additional £200 million in grants or prudential borrowing for
improvements to the electric bus fleet, by using WPL revenue to match fund
• Winner of the 2017 Ashden award for Clean Air in Towns and Cities
• Constrained forecasted congestion growth by 47%
• A 5.79% reduction in average total transport emissions since 2012
The WPL has also allowed Nottingham City Council to acquire additional funding from
central government and together this has been invested in:

• A £570m tram line expansion, transforming a single line into a network with
17km more track. NET Phase Two alone serves around 1,800 workplaces
• £60m for the regeneration of Nottingham Station, delivering a 21st century
transport hub
• Support to the Linkbus network which connects key employment sites,
Nottingham’s two major hospitals, the two universities, East Midlands Airport
and the city centre
• The Citycard Cycles scheme – a citywide bike share solution
• The world’s largest fleet of bio-gas double decker buses
• One of the largest fleets of electric buses in Europe
• Providing grants of up to £25,000 to employers for cycle shelters, showers,
cycle infrastructure and safety equipment, the purchase of electric bicycles and
electric cargo bikes, etc.
Nottingham City Council’s significant investment in transport decarbonisation enabled
it to be the first local authority in England and Wales to gain central government
approval for its Local Air Quality Management Plan, critically without the need for a
CAZ.
The measures taken by Nottingham City Council have seen the city’s carbon dioxide
emissions fall by a quarter since 2015; much of this is a direct result of modal shift and
a significantly reduced number of car journeys. Due to the progress made so far, the
political leadership in Nottingham has set the city the target of becoming the UK’s first
carbon neutral city by 2028.

Page 165
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |7
4.0 Methodology

The following chapter outlines the various activities and workshops conducted by the
Nottingham City Council project team which contributed to the formation of the
Feasibility Study.
It was agreed that project work would commence in May 2021 and would be completed
and delivered to Bristol City Council for sign-off at the end of August 2021.
The scope of works and key workstreams to be delivered to Bristol City Council are
finalised in this Feasibility Study Report. The report focuses on assessing the
preparedness of Bristol City Council to start the formal process of delivering its own
WPL scheme.
The following key deliverables have been produced as part of this Feasibility Study:
1. A WPL Route Map that outlines the key stages and activities required to
achieve the target “go live” date
2. Specialist advice and recommendations resulting from a thorough review of the
Atkins Study
3. A WPL Governance and Project Team Structure that would assist Bristol City
Council’s preparation for the delivery of the WPL Route Map
4. A Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan
5. A Risk Register that assesses Bristol City Council’s readiness for the delivery
of the WPL Route Map
In the project proposal a number of different tasks were agreed between Nottingham
City Council and Bristol City Council. The aim of these tasks was to provide bespoke
information and knowledge transfer to Bristol City Council, while also providing
Nottingham City Council with key Bristol City Council specific information to enable the
formation of a tailored WPL Route Map. To gain more knowledge for inclusion in this
report, the following workshops were conducted:

• A stakeholder and communications workshop was held on 14th May 2021. The
Nottingham City Council project team met with Bristol City Council’s Head of
City Transport and Principal Transport Planner. The Nottingham City Council
project team reviewed the Stakeholder Radar (Appendix G) and the 2x2
Power/Influence by Interest in WPL Matrix (Appendix H), with the officers from
Bristol City Council providing feedback and providing details of additional
stakeholders which they felt should be included
• A second workshop focusing on milestones and dependencies was held on
19th May 2021. The Nottingham City Council project team met with Bristol City
Council’s Head of City Transport and Principal Transport Planner to identify key
national and local events that could impact on the delivery of a WPL scheme
and therefore would be necessary to monitor and manage if Bristol City Council
were to go ahead with scheme development. At this workshop, the Bristol City

Page 166
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |8
Council officers requested a high level three year Timeline for a Bristol WPL
Scheme (Appendix E) that outlines the key workstreams from the WPL Route
Map
• A third workshop focusing on risk management was held on 16th July 2021.
Nottingham City Council prepared a Risk Register which consisted of possible
events or scenarios that could pose a risk to Bristol City Council commencing
Stage One of the WPL Route Map. The risk register was shared and discussed
with officers from Bristol City Council. All the risks were reviewed and suitable
actions were identified that would mitigate the risks as far as possible. The
Bristol City Council Risk Register is included at Appendix I and is discussed in
greater detail in Section 5.6
• The Nottingham City Council project team also held ‘catch up’ calls at the
request of the Principal Transport Planner from Bristol City Council to provide
updates on the Feasibility Study and to gain input from Bristol City Council as
the project progressed
• Additional meetings were held between the Nottingham City Council project
team and other internal specialists who have all contributed to the production
of this Feasibility Study Report and shaped the deliverables

To continue the progress made within this Feasibility Study Report, there are a number
of recommendations made throughout the document and summarised in Appendix J
which would assist Bristol City Council to swiftly progress to Stage One of the WPL
Route Map.

Page 167
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |9
5.0 Deliverables

The following chapter details the work that has been undertaken so far by Nottingham
City Council on the key workstreams and includes all relevant outputs, along with
referencing accompanying appendices.
The chapter also informs Bristol City Council of the scale and scope of the work to be
undertaken to deliver their own WPL scheme and recommends areas for prioritisation
to ensure a smooth transition to Stage One of the WPL Route Map.

5.1 Key Stages and Activities
The WPL Route Map outlines the key workstreams which are required to be completed
in order for Bristol City Council to successfully implement a WPL scheme. The
following section sets out the detail behind the WPL Route Map.
An essential part of the preparation for introducing a WPL is to understand the scale
and complexity of the project, the different workstreams involved and the necessary
skills, experience, resources and budget that will be required. Understanding these
fundamentals will ensure that the project is sufficiently resourced, robustly managed
and the expected milestones and outcomes are achieved.
Based upon Nottingham City Council’s experience, the WPL project can be split into
three main stages:

• Stage One: Scheme Development and Outline Business Case (OBC)
• Stage Two: Public Consultation, Final Business Case (FBC) and Scheme
Approval
• Stage Three: Implementation and Operation

Using a proven project management approach and experienced resources is essential
for a project of this importance, scale and risk, as this will ensure that the costs, quality
and expected timescales for the project are maintained and achieved.
The knowledge transfer of the key elements of the WPL Route Map to the Bristol City
Council project team will be critical once Bristol City Council approve and assign the
necessary resources for the WPL Project Team structure (see Section 5.4). The
establishment of a WPL Project Team, in particular the project management
resources, will enable the adoption of Bristol City Council’s preferred project
management methodology (such as PRINCE2 or Association for Project Management
[APM]) and subsequent suite of project management products, which are all
necessary to allow Bristol City Council to commence the initiation of Stage One of the
WPL Route Map.

Page 168
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 10
5.1.1 (WS1.0) Stage One: Scheme Development – Outline Business Case
(OBC)

Stage One of the WPL Route Map requires the commissioning and utilisation of
relevant studies and modelling to create a foundation to justify introducing a WPL
scheme in Bristol. The findings should be concentrated to inform the production of a
robust and detailed OBC, underpinning the implementation of a Bristol City Council
WPL scheme.
Stage One of the WPL Route Map sets out the five workstreams which will inform the
OBC:
(WS1.1) Supporting Studies/Information
Following reviews of the “question and answer” responses provided by Bristol City
Council Officers in September 2020, the Atkins Study and discussions held between
Nottingham City Council and Bristol City Council, it is clear that Bristol City Council
already have extensive information and supporting studies on key areas such as
economic factors, transport, congestion, air quality, deprivation and social
inclusion/exclusion, which will all contribute towards an OBC. However, some of the
information obtained (e.g. the Atkins Study) is now out of date and may need
updating.7
It is important to review all studies to ensure that the facts and figures that will be used
in an OBC are up to date, comprehensive and relevant to the project objectives. Where
this is found to not be the case, consideration should be given to the commissioning
of further studies that will support the production of a comprehensive and coherent
OBC by the end of Stage One.
Recommendation R1 – Review relevant economic, transport, congestion, air quality,
deprivation and social inclusion/exclusion studies and ensure that they are up to date
Recommendation R2 – Assess the need to commission new studies where
information in current studies is out of date
(WS1.2) Measures and Monitoring
The Atkins Study provides a good start in determining the potential number of
workplace parking places (WPPs) there are in the Bristol City Council Central Core,
Expanded Central Core and Citywide areas. However, as stated already, this data is
historic and it is essential that there is up to date, robust quantitative and qualitative
data available to assess the proposed scope and impacts of a WPL scheme. A robust
dataset will enable effective modelling and scheme development to be undertaken in
Stage One and will ensure that any risks regarding impacts or income are considered
and mitigated at an early stage of the project.

7 Atkins: Bristol Workplace Parking Levy Scoping Study, February 2011

Page 169
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 11
Conducting an OSPA to formulate a dataset which provides an early understanding of
the “make-up” of employers (type, size, location) and the estimated number of WPPs
in Bristol is key, as this information will provide a clear baseline for scheme
development and will inform key internal decisions on what will be included in the draft
Bristol City Council WPL scheme design (i.e. exemptions, discounts, level of charge,
etc.)
The data can also be linked to other council data sources such as the Local Land and
Property Gazetteer and Geographical Information System; this link will ensure that
information on all known employers is captured and maintained, establishing an early
and dynamic database of employers which is necessary for the licensing and
compliance phases. It is also important to ensure that all data gathered is General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) compliant.
Due to the importance of comprehensive and current data and its impact on the
successful implementation of a WPL, it is recommended that further parking studies
are carried out to bring the information contained within the Atkins Study up to date
and to populate some of the information missing from the final report.
Nottingham City Council is able to conduct a desktop parking exercise using multiple
regression analysis to estimate how many WPPs Bristol may have. The exercise uses
real time data from Nottingham’s unique WPL Licensing System to estimate how many
potential liable workplace parking places (LWPPs) another local authority may have,
based on the relationships between a number of variables and the number of licensed
LWPPs for employers in Nottingham. Once a study is conducted, it will be necessary
to update and refine the results periodically throughout the development and
implementation stages of the project; this will ensure that the datasets and estimates
are up to date and reflective of the current local economic climate.
Recommendation R3 – Carry out an OSPA to understand the “make-up” of
employers and form a baseline dataset for scheme development
Recommendation R4 – Commission Nottingham City Council to conduct a desktop
parking exercise using multiple regression analysis and based on Nottingham’s live
WPL Licensing System, to estimate how many LWPPs Bristol may have
(WS1.3) Modelling
It will be necessary for Bristol City Council to demonstrate how a WPL scheme will
contribute towards the delivery of its plans and priorities for the city (e.g. One City
Plan, Strategic Corridors, ICTF, air quality and congestion). Fundamentally, it is
expected that the focus of modelling should be on the financial, transport and
economic impacts of a WPL, although there may be other modelling considerations.
The objectives and content of the WECA’s JLTP5 must be included while also
addressing other priorities and objectives that are regarded as key to the future
success of the city of Bristol, Bristol City Council’s wider administrative area and the
greater Bristol region. It is essential that modelling shows the full extent of the impact

Page 170
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 12
and benefits that are expected to be delivered as part of the introduction of a WPL
scheme and the investment in the Bristol City Council WPL Package (see WS1.5).
Recommendation R5 – Model the transport, financial and economic elements of the
WPL scheme to illustrate how it would operate and fund future transport projects
(WS1.4) WPL Scheme Development
As identified in WS1.2 above, establishing robust datasets on employers and the
estimated number of WPPs will be necessary to assist in the outline WPL scheme
design (i.e. proposed exemptions, discounts, charging, income generation, business
support etc.). The data will also be an essential part of the Stakeholder Management
Strategy and Communications Plan as the scheme progresses and gains momentum.
It will be important for the datasets and scheme design to show how the WPL will fit
into the delivery of the wider transport vision of Bristol and the WECA through the
JLTP5 and One City Plan. Outline detail will be sought from key stakeholders as part
of the stakehol
der engagement process (see Section 5.5) and it is necessary to ensure that Bristol
City Council’s WPL scheme principles are outlined at the earliest stage.
A clear set of principles will result in consistent and robust guidance being issued by
Bristol City Council to employers and other key stakeholders, as well as ensuring that
any decisions on potential benefits (e.g. applying discounts to certain types or sizes of
employers) and impacts (e.g. estimated charge per LWPP) are identified and
undertaken in an informed and evidence based manner. The scheme principles will
be a key component of the Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications
Plan for early informal stakeholder engagement as part of Stage One of the WPL
Route Map and in advance of the public consultation workstream in Stage Two.
It will be important to develop and maintain a risk management strategy during Stage
One. A Risk Register should be created, assigned to a project team member to
regularly update and to add new risks and mitigations for identified risks. The WPL
Project Team should look to review the Risk Register regularly, with the document
owner flagging any new risks or confirming when risks are closed.
During WS1.4, attention should be given to starting to develop a draft WPL Scheme
Order. It will be necessary to have a draft WPL Scheme Order as an appendix to the
OBC and for it to be available for the public consultation programme (WS2.2).
The work carried out across WS1.1 to WS1.4 will need to feature in the OBC in order
to demonstrate the need for a WPL scheme, how much it would cost to operate, what
the WPL will fund and which geographical area(s) the scheme would cover.
It will also be necessary to undertake the mapping of current and potential displaced
parking hotspots around employment centres to accelerate the delivery of prioritised
traffic management schemes should a scheme larger than the Central Core scheme
be chosen. Once the WPL scheme “goes live”, it is likely that some commuters will

Page 171
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 13
look to find cheaper or free parking; it is therefore important that a hotspot mapping
analysis exercise is started to identify and address these potential issues before they
arise. However, if the preferred Central Core scheme is chosen then it is felt that the
existing Residents Permit Schemes should cover and tackle potential displaced
parking.
If a WPL is implemented, Bristol City Council will be liable to pay the charge and it is
recommended that early consideration is given as to how this cost will be met.
Nottingham City Council chose to implement a car park management scheme, the
WPC, which charges employees to park at their workplace in an effort to encourage
them to make more sustainable travel choices. The amount each staff member pays
for parking is dependent on their pay grade, with higher earners paying more. The
WPC scheme helps fund Nottingham City Council's parking management systems on
its employee car parks as well as being used to pay some of Nottingham City Council’s
WPL charge. It is recommended that Bristol City Council scope a car park
management scheme during WS1.4, to show that it is taking a lead in commuter
management.
As work for Stage One begins, a clear Stakeholder Management Strategy and
Communications Plan must be developed that looks to discuss and gain an
understanding of the future transport infrastructure that medium and large employers
would like to see introduced.
Recommendation R6 – Introduce a risk management strategy and regularly update
the Risk Register
Recommendation R7 – Draft a WPL Scheme Order
Recommendation R8 – Introduce and progress the displaced parking workstream to
tackle the potential displacement of commuter parking
Recommendation R9 – Consider the introduction of a car park management scheme
at Bristol City Council premises, where commuter parking occurs
(WS1.5) WPL Package
The WPL Project Team should determine the WPL Package, which will be funded from
the revenue generated. The WPL Package should be outlined in the OBC and it must
show how it will allow Bristol City Council to achieve the vision and targets outlined in
the One City Plan and upcoming JLTP5. The OBC should set out how much the WPL
Package will cost to implement and how it will be funded, i.e. through the revenue
generated by the WPL scheme and alternative sources such as grants, prudential
borrowing, etc.
It is a legal requirement of the primary legislation (Transport Act 2000) that WPL
scheme revenue is ring-fenced for the delivery of Local Transport Plan policies and
objectives. It will be necessary for Bristol City Council to identify what the WPL scheme
will be expected to contribute towards and how it is an essential part of the delivery of

Page 172
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 14
Bristol City Council’s transport strategy; this will also form a key part of the
communications messaging undertaken as part of the early Stakeholder Management
Strategy and informal consultation messaging and engagement.
Early thought should also be given towards what type of business support programme
will be established to assist and support employers in preparing for the introduction of
the WPL scheme. The business support function should advise employers on how
they can take advantage of key support packages relating to travel planning, parking
management, active travel and demand management in advance of the scheme being
implemented. A quality business support offer will help mitigate any negative
perceptions of the scheme and maximise early delivery of the positive impacts of the
WPL.
The expected outputs from the delivery of the five Stage One workstreams (WS1.1 to
WS1.5 above) will form the basis for Bristol City Council to formally progress to Stage
Two of the WPL Route Map and commit the necessary resources and budgets to
advance the scheme.
Recommendation R10 – Outline the transport package that will be funded by the
revenue generated from a WPL scheme

5.1.2 (PM1.0) Stage One Project Management – Outputs

The adoption of a proven project management methodology and application of
experienced project management resources to manage the internal and external
resources in the delivery of the identified workstreams will be key; it will ensure that
risks and issues are effectively minimised or mitigated, costs and budget management
is closely scrutinised and timescales are adhered to.
It is expected that at the conclusion of Stage One of the WPL Route Map, the following
outputs will be delivered and approval can then be sought from the Bristol City Council
management team to proceed to Stage Two:
(PM1.1) Outline Business Case (OBC)
The OBC will provide justification and a comprehensive explanation of the following:

• Why the scheme is being implemented
• What scheme is being implemented
• How the scheme will be implemented
• Who is implementing the scheme
• When the scheme will be implemented by

The OBC will be the primary document that Bristol City Council will use as part of the
public consultation exercise in Stage Two.

Page 173
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 15
(PM1.2) Supporting Appendices
All relevant supporting studies, information and modelling will be appended to the
OBC. The appendices will demonstrate that Bristol City Council have undertaken
detailed works to provide the foundations for a WPL scheme, which are supported by
relevant expert advice and, ideally, based upon strong evidence from Nottingham’s
WPL scheme. The appendices will include supporting studies, modelling and datasets
on employers to estimate the potential number of LWPPs, through OSPAs and the
unique multiple regression analysis exercise. The appendices will also set out how the
WPL scheme forms part of, and complies with, local, regional and national policy,
guidance and objectives.
(PM1.3) Draft WPL Scheme Design
The guiding principles for Bristol City Council’s WPL scheme will be set out at the end
of Stage One, to enable employers and key stakeholders to understand how the
scheme is expected to work and what impacts the scheme would have on these
relevant groups. The scheme design will also demonstrate the options around which
elements of the scheme may be consulted upon as part of the public consultation
process (i.e. potential discounts for particular types of employer – the NHS, emergency
services, charities, etc.).
(PM1.4) Approval to Proceed to Stage Two
The appropriate Bristol City Council approval process would need to be complied with
and relevant processes and procedures must be followed to enable Bristol City Council
to make a formal decision at the end of Stage One to either stop any further scheme
development, delay scheme development, undertake further works to enhance the
OBC or approve the OBC and proceed to Stage Two.

5.1.3 (WS2.0) Stage Two: Public Consultation and Approval

Stage Two of the WPL Route Map will focus on preparing the relevant documentation,
processes, procedures and activities to undertake a formal public consultation. A
formal public consultation is recommended as good practice by the DfT, although the
length of the consultation period is a decision to be made by the local authority. The
tasks mentioned will assist in formalising the OBC into a FBC, following completion of
the public consultation. The FBC will then be submitted to the Secretary of State for
Transport for their approval to progress to Stage Three.
In conjunction with the work above, a detailed scheme design will need to be
completed and the relevant specifications and procurement activities undertaken to
prepare Bristol City Council for implementation of the WPL scheme in Stage Three.

Page 174
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 16
Stage Two of the WPL Route Map sets out the four key workstreams required to
undertake the public consultation exercise and gain the subsequent approvals to
proceed to Stage Three:
(WS2.1) Public Consultation Preparation
Bristol City Council will need to create and manage the necessary public consultation
documentation (leaflets, posters, letters, etc.) and communication platforms (social
media, websites, phoneline, email inboxes, etc.) to deliver a thorough public
consultation programme. All events and activities (such as employer workshops) will
need to be planned in to ensure that the consultation is comprehensive, consistent
and actively engages all relevant stakeholder groups in the process. During WS2.1, it
will be necessary to work with representatives in marketing and communications to
identify if Bristol City Council have a policy for public consultation which they must
follow.
The latest government guidance does not state specifically how long a public
consultation period should be.8 If Bristol City Council are unable to show that adequate
consultation has taken place, then this could lead to the Secretary of State for
Transport rejecting or delaying Bristol’s WPL scheme. It will therefore be important for
the WPL Project Team to work with the marketing and communications
representatives to identify a sufficient consultation period and demonstrate that robust
and adequate consultation has taken place. Bristol City Council must justify the chosen
consultation period and show that adequate engagement was held with stakeholders.
Recommendation R11 – Develop a detailed public consultation programme including
specified timeframes, activities and methodology
(WS2.2) Public Consultation
The public consultation programme will require a significant amount of additional
resources to undertake events and activities, engaging with interested parties and
stakeholders through both proactive and reactive communications. The consultation
will include the processing, categorisation and management of all responses, as well
as any additional data collection, analysis and compilation of reports that will form a
necessary part of the submission to the Secretary of State for Transport for approval.
The result of the work detailed above will culminate in the production of a suite of
public consultation documents, setting out Bristol City Council’s response to the public
consultation and informing the production of the FBC. The resulting FBC will be the
justification for Bristol City Council’s WPL scheme and, at this point, the scheme will
be based upon robust and tested evidence, which has met or exceeded the legislative
requirements addressed in the Red Tape Challenge and has undergone significant
and sustained local, regional and national scrutiny.9

8 Consultation Principles 2018 - link
9 Department For Transport (2012) - Roads: Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) - link

Page 175
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 17
Recommendation R12 – Carry out a robust public consultation programme to engage
and consult with all key stakeholders

(WS2.3) WPL Approval
The FBC and supporting documentation will need to be packaged and approved by
Bristol City Council in consultation with the DfT. Once the FBC has been approved, it
will be submitted to the Secretary of State for Transport for their consideration and
approval. At this stage, the approval process, and therefore the timeline, will sit with
central government rather than Bristol City Council and any further work towards
preparing for Stage Three will be undertaken at risk until an approval decision is
provided. Early and continued engagement with the DfT and the Secretary of State
for Transport will be essential to minimise the risk of significant delays or changes to
the proposed scheme design.
Along with the FBC, the suite of supporting documents should include a finalised WPL
Scheme Order which is updated and reflects feedback from the public consultation
programme.
(WS2.4) WPL Scheme Development
In parallel to workstreams WS2.1 to WS2.3, a detailed WPL scheme development
programme will need to be undertaken to prepare the necessary information for the
public consultation campaign. Items to be addressed will include:

• How Bristol City Council’s WPL scheme will operate
• Who will be impacted
• What the charges will be
• How the scheme will be enforced
• What business support will be provided

The final options for the detailed scheme design will be agreed once the public
consultation has concluded. The scheme design and WPL Scheme Order will then
need to be finalised and submitted as part of the FBC and public consultation
documentation.
It will also be necessary for roles and responsibilities to be specified for the day-to-day
operational running of the WPL scheme. The procurement processes for the finance
and employer licensing systems must also be outlined in Stage Two, in order for Bristol
City Council to prepare the options and the preferred route for how they plan to operate
their WPL scheme if they successfully progress to Stage Three. The options for the
running of the scheme are in-house, joint venture or outsourced operating models,
which should be considered by Bristol City Council to enable the necessary due
diligence (specifications, tendering, procurement, value for money etc.) to be
undertaken and enable the preferred route for delivery in Stage Three.

Page 176
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 18
It is also important to develop and finalise the business support package programme
(e.g. travel planning and parking management advice and assistance, cycle
infrastructure grants, public transport investment detail and personal journey planning,
traffic management programme for displaced parking) that Bristol City Council will
provide in advance to employers to help them prepare for the WPL scheme.

5.1.4 (PM2.0) Project Management – Outputs

The adoption of a proven project management methodology and application of
experienced project management resources to manage the internal and external
resources in the delivery of the identified workstreams will be key; ensuring that risks
and issues are effectively minimised or mitigated, costs and budget management is
closely scrutinised and timescales are adhered to.
It is expected that at the conclusion of Stage Two of the WPL Route Map, the following
outputs will be delivered and approval can then be sought from the Bristol City Council
management team to proceed to Stage Three:
(PM2.1) Approved WPL Final Business Case (FBC)
The FBC will be finalised and approved for the implementation of a Bristol City Council
WPL scheme. The FBC will include all relevant supporting appendices, the final
scheme design, WPL Scheme Order and the supporting suite of public consultation
documentation. The FBC will then be approved by Bristol City Council and submitted
to the Secretary of State for Transport for their approval.
(PM2.2) Detailed Scheme Design for Stage Three
Bristol City Council’s preferred option for how it will implement and operate their WPL
scheme will be finalised and the necessary investment and preparatory works will have
been undertaken, to ensure that Bristol City Council is ready to deliver its WPL scheme
in line with the key milestone dates identified in Stage Three.
(PM2.3) Confirmed Project Plan to “Go Live”
Stage Three will include key milestone dates and activities that will require extensive
project management and allocation of resources, as Bristol City Council will have
committed to scheme implementation and the operational “go live” plan. Stage Three
carries significant reputational and income risks if there is a failure to deliver the
relevant workstreams or there are any delays to the overall programme.
(PM2.4) Approval to Proceed to Stage Three
The relevant Bristol City Council approval processes would need to be complied with
to enable Bristol City Council to make the formal decision at the end of Stage Two;
this would follow the Secretary of State for Transport’s approval to proceed to Stage
Three and commit Bristol City Council to implementing its WPL scheme.

Page 177
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 19
5.1.5 (WS3.0) Stage Three: Implementation and Operation

Stage Three of the WPL Route Map will focus on engagement with employers, to
ensure that they are aware of their legal obligations and the practical steps involved in
obtaining their WPL licence(s). The engagement will include demonstrating all of the
necessary front and back office licensing processes and requirements to ensure that
the scheme is successfully implemented and employers are acting in accordance with
the legislation.
Assuming Bristol City Council follow Nottingham City Council’s WPL scheme
implementation programme, employers will start to be required to license between 1st
January 2024 and 31st March 2024, as Bristol City Council begin to populate their
licensing database. There will then be a six month period of ‘no charging’ from 1st
April 2024, while work is actively undertaken to ensure employers are licensed
correctly and any non-compliance is addressed appropriately before charging
commences on 1st October 2024. These indicative dates provide Bristol City Council
with suggested key milestones for embarking on the WPL Route Map approach to
implementing a WPL scheme.
Stage Three of the WPL Route Map sets out the next four workstreams required to
implement and operate a WPL scheme:
(WS3.1) WPL Implementation
Once the implementation stage is ready to proceed, Bristol City Council will need to
create the necessary information and communication platforms to deliver a wide range
of detail to employers, to explain their legal obligations and provide guidance on how
to obtain a WPL licence.
The practical events and activities (employer workshops) in the lead up to the
implementation date should focus on providing employers with working guidance and
assistance in obtaining a WPL licence and complying with the legal requirements of
the scheme.
(WS3.2) Employer Licensing
It is recommended that a three month period prior to 1st April 2024 is used to populate
the licensing database with all employer details, ready for the issuing of the first WPL
licences. The system for obtaining a WPL licence should be straightforward for
employers with clear guidance as to what information is required. It is important to
support and encourage employers during this period to engage and apply for a licence;
focused employer workshops and targeted licensing support (small, medium, large
employers) will all assist in ensuring that employers are licensed before the scheme
“goes live”.
(WS3.3) Scheme “Go Live” (No WPL Charge for Six Months)

Page 178
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 20
The Secretary of State for Transport recommended to Nottingham City Council during
their WPL scheme implementation stage that a “no charge” period should be in place
for a period of six months. The period of six months is recommended as it provides
enough time to allow the local authority to work with employers to ensure that they
have obtained a WPL licence and are licensed correctly. Moreover, this provides time
for employers to understand their legal obligations and the potential consequences
should they not comply. The six month “no charge” period was extremely beneficial in
Nottingham’s experience, as a significant amount of initial non-compliance was found
to be unintentional and was rectified relatively simply by educating employers on the
details of the WPL scheme.
It will also be necessary to start the WPL licence renewal process during this stage as
a WPL licence is issued on an annual basis. Nottingham’s WPL operates by the
financial year (1st April to 31st March), as this fits in with most business’ accounts but
there is no reason why the licensing period cannot begin on a different date.
The window for employers to renew their licence opens three months before the new
licensing year. A period of three months allows sufficient time to process licences and
encourages employers to review and renew their licences in advance of the 31st
March deadline. The renewal process is straightforward and, in Nottingham, is
completed by the employer through their online WPL account, a process which
typically takes less than 10 minutes.
(WS3.4) WPL Charging Commences
Assuming the WPL scheme is delivered in line with the timescales above, charging
will commence from 1st October 2024. Compliance and enforcement activities will be
a priority for the Bristol City Council WPL Operational Team at this stage, in relation
to any employers who remain unlicensed or are believed to be licensed incorrectly.
Business support resources will continue to provide packages aimed at helping
employers to comply and manage their WPL provision and liability. The traffic
management team will prioritise addressing displaced parking hotspots that
materialise following ‘go live’. Furthermore, the team should monitor and respond as
appropriate when employers adopt parking management schemes and employees
change their travel behaviour (predominantly expected during the first three years of
operation).

5.1.6 (PM3.0) Project Management – Outputs

It is expected that at the conclusion of Stage Three of the WPL Route Map, the
following outputs will be delivered to confirm the completion of the project and the
Bristol City Council WPL Project Team will hand over any outstanding issues (e.g.
operational improvements) to the Bristol City Council WPL Operational Team, as the
scheme moves into its ‘business as usual’ phase:
(PM3.1) All WPL Employers Licensed

Page 179
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 21
All employers that provide any WPPs in the Bristol City Council scheme area will have
obtained a WPL licence during the “no charge” period and then rene
wed that licence ahead of the charging period using their online WPL account.
(PM3.2) Compliance and Enforcement Commenced
The Bristol City Council WPL Operational Team will have commenced all relevant
compliance and enforcement activities and will be focused on ensuring all employers
are licensed correctly and prioritising the deployment of business support resources.
(PM3.3) WPL Charging Commenced and Income Generation
The charging will have commenced and all front and back office processes and
procedures will be tested and operating. Income generation will be ring-fenced for the
WPL operation and accompanying business support, along with the investment and
delivery of relevant LTP policies and objectives (WPL Package) that are outlined in
the approved Bristol City Council WPL Scheme Order.
(PM3.4) Business Support Actively in Place
The business support team will be actively supporting the Bristol City Council WPL
Operational Team to enable a smooth introduction of the scheme and assisting
employers to manage their WPL liability and workplace parking. WPL business
support is expected to cover travel planning, car park management, journey planning,
public transport investment detail, supporting grants and cycling support.

Page 180
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 22
5.2 Milestones and External Dependencies

To establish a WPL Route Map, it is important to consider the project milestones and
dependencies that must be monitored and managed to ensure successful delivery of
the Bristol City Council WPL scheme.
The milestones and dependencies are centred around key national, regional and local
events that may have positive or negative impacts on the delivery of the project. The
Milestones and Dependencies Timeline (Appendix D) shows the key milestones and
events that will be important to monitor and manage in Bristol. To identify the
milestones and dependencies, Nottingham City Council met with key officers from
Bristol City Council to identify relevant events covering the period from April 2021 to
the anticipated Bristol City Council WPL scheme “go live” date of October 2024, when
charging commences.
Although it has not been referenced in the Milestones and Dependencies Timeline,
the full effects of Brexit are yet to be felt and it will be important to monitor the reaction
of businesses as the UK’s relationship with the wider world adjusts to this change. The
customs transitional arrangement will end at the beginning of January 2022, meaning
that importers must begin submitting their new customs declaration on all relevant
goods.10 It is too early to ascertain the impact of this on Bristol businesses but it is
clearly one example of why the continuing “new normal” post-Brexit needs to be
monitored.
55% of Bristol’s exports are sold to the European Union (EU) and nearly half of
exporters in Bristol feel that their trade with the EU will decrease post-Brexit, which
could impact on productivity and employment within Bristol.11 In addition to this, a
report conducted post-Brexit by the Centre for Cities estimated that cities such as
Bristol may see a drop in the Gross Value Added of the city due to their large share of
employment within private-sector knowledge-intensive services.12 It will be necessary
to monitor and engage with businesses as the EU trade agreement comes into full
effect to establish the positive and negative impacts, both short and long term, in order
to adapt to the new post-Brexit market and adapt the WPL scheme as required to cater
for these changes. Conversely, trade deals with countries such as the one recently
established with Australia open up new markets and opportunities for Bristol
businesses and could well see the “make-up” of businesses within Bristol change; this

10 UK forces to delay checks on imports from EU by six months - link
11 Why Bristol’s economic prosperity is ‘at risk’ – link
12 Clayton, N & Overman, H.G. (2017). Brexit, trade and the economic impacts on UK cities, Centre for Cities -

link

Page 181
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 23
could influence decisions when developing the WPL scheme such as the small
employer discount threshold or level of charge.
Since March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has seen countries around the world go
into “lockdown” and commuting reduce dramatically as people were instructed to work
from home. Across the UK, cities saw improvements in air quality and congestion due
to the implementation of these lockdown restrictionsbut unsurprisingly, the levels of
pollution increased again whenever restrictions were eased. Analysis conducted by
the Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs showed a 44% drop in NO2
levels from the previous year but pollutants such as PM2.5 and PM10 saw a steady
rise throughout the year. 13 The outbreak of COVID-19 led to an increase in the use of
private motor vehicles for both commuting and personal journeys, due to reduced
confidence in safety on public transport. As the threat of COVID-19 reduces and
confidence in using public transport returns, it is expected that levels of PM2.5 and
PM10 will reduce to pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels; however it will be important to
monitor the “new normal” in terms of travel behaviour and working arrangements. The
employment “make-up” of Bristol suggests that at least 50% of workers have the ability
to work from home in some capacity.14 It is important to continue to monitor these
datasets and manage the impact of new ways of working upon Bristol’s air quality and
congestion as we come out of COVID-19 restrictions, to ensure that the WPL scheme
and WPL package meet the needs of the post-pandemic city.
The local elections in May 2021 saw the Green Party gain seats in Bristol. The Green
Party endorse a WPL scheme as part of the solution to the congestion and air quality
problems in Bristol; therefore the extra seats held by the Green Party on Bristol City
Council increases the support for a scheme.15 It will be important for the Bristol City
Council Mayor and WPL Project Team to engage with the Green Party as part of the
development of the WPL scheme, as their support would be beneficial to the
successful delivery of the WPL project.
In order to tackle air quality issues in Bristol, the Bristol CAZ will be implemented in
summer 2022 and it is envisaged that the CAZ, along with other measures, will
improve air quality in Bristol and make the city compliant with central government
targets by 2023. However, the WPL Package will outline how the WPL scheme will
further improve air quality in Bristol in order to contribute towards the goal for becoming
a carbon neutral city by 2030 and ensure air quality levels are sustainable as the city
grows and prospers. It will therefore be important to regularly monitor air quality levels
to ensure that the air quality targets set out in the FBC are achievable and build on the
progress made by the CAZ.
The Bus Service Improvement Plan will be submitted in October 2021. Improving the
bus network across Bristol is seen as one of the main deliverables of the WPL

13 Bristol's traffic patterns have changed during the Coronavirus pandemic - link; Quino, V., & Enenkel, K. (2020)

- How have the Covid pandemic and lockdown affected air quality in cities? link
14 NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics, Bristol - link
15 Green Proposal to raise millions of pounds to shake up transport in Bristol - link

Page 182
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 24
Package, therefore monitoring the funds received and improvements realised as part
of the plan is critical. The WPL Package aims to build on the Bus Back Better
improvements in order to deliver the objectives within the One City Plan of making the
bus services in Bristol cleaner, cheaper and more accessible to its citizens.
Similarly, it is important to ensure that the active travel element of the WPL Package
is complementary to the Liveable Neighbourhoods policy outlined in the JLTP4.
The JLTP5 will set out a vision for transport in Bristol and it is important to ensure that
the WPL Package fits into the wider transport vision for the WECA, to minimise cross-
boundary conflicts in transport policy.
The CRSTS, which is a follow up to the TCF2, will go live for the submission of bids in
2023. The WPL Project Team will need to monitor and support any bids submitted by
the WECA, ensuring that they are complementary to the WPL Package and
demonstrate how they will help deliver the wider transport goals outlined by the WECA
in the JLTP5.
There are a number of major projects planned from 2024 and beyond that will also
require monitoring, these include city centre redevelopments and the implementation
of “strategic corridors”, which are areas where it is expected that Bristol City Council
will see economic growth following investment in transport infrastructure. It will be
critical to monitor and engage with these projects to ensure that the proposed WPL
Package integrates and supports the wider JLTP5 and One City Plan.
The One City Plan aims to create a fairer, greener society which residents are proud
to live and work in; key parts of the plan are to boost productivity, culture and transport.
The WPL Package should be viewed as contributing to the delivery of the wider One
City Plan goals, in particular the desired improvements in sustainable transport and
the 2030 carbon neutral city commitment.
The Timeline for a Bristol WPL Scheme contains key dates and periods for the critical
workstreams across a three-stage approach. The timeline has been calculated under
the assumption that Bristol City Council would begin to develop a WPL scheme in
October 2021 and aim to “go live” in October 2024.
It is essential to regularly review and update the Milestones and Dependencies
Timeline so that any impact on the delivery of the WPL Route Map can be identified
and included within the project Risk Register, with appropriate risk mitigation put into
place. A comprehensive review will be necessary over the next six to nine months to
inform Bristol City Council’s WPL plans, as the impact of ongoing dependencies such
as COVID-19, Brexit, Bristol’s CAZ and the Bus Back Better strategy become clearer.
Recommendation R13 – Monitor the new working arrangements and commuter
travel behaviour as a return to a “new normal” begins, following the lifting of lockdown
restrictions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic

Page 183
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 25
Recommendation R14 – Regularly review and update the Milestones and
Dependencies Timeline
5.3 Data Analysis and Quality Assurance of the Atkins Study

Nottingham City Council have carried out an in-depth review of the Atkins Study
produced in February 2011.
The analysis of the study sought to assess the validity of the methodology used by
Atkins to estimate the potential number of WPPs in the Bristol City Council
administrative area. The review also contains a high-level assessment of the small
employer discount threshold and provides an estimate on potential income based on
the study results.
The review is split into four sections:
1. Description of Methodology
2. Analysis/Critique of Methodology
3. Estimate on Potential Income
4. Recommendations
This analysis will provide a robust basis to undertake further work to calculate the
number of potential WPPs in Bristol for a Central Core, Expanded Central Core and
Citywide scheme area.

5.3.1 Description of Methodology

The Nottingham City Council project team carried out a review of the Atkins Study and
the following section provides a brief description of the methodology used by Atkins,
as understood by Nottingham City Council. The audit carried out by Atkins in 2011
focussed on collating data through site visits (car counts) and analysis of aerial
photography. Where car parks were not accessible or hidden, the surveyors based
their estimates for these sites on the proportion of the building plot (estimated by
surveyors) and an assumed relationship of one parking space per 25 square metres.
The survey results were then cross-referenced and validated with Valuation Office
Agency (VOA) data. The surveyors also used the VOA online search function to
validate the WPP estimates within hidden buildings or undercrofts.
A further check of the surveyors’ estimates was then conducted by Atkins, comparing
the WPP estimates for the city centre with the number of inbound private vehicle trips
made into the city centre. The surveyors considered the number of public car parking
spaces when checking the difference in the number of journeys made into the city
centre and the number of estimated WPPs. The difference between the total parking
stock in the city centre and inbound journeys made into the city centre lead to a surplus
of 5,936 spaces that were unaccounted for. Atkins concluded that “some” of these
journeys were for leisure or non-commuting business purposes but there were still
regularly unused parking spaces.

Page 184
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 26
Therefore when reading the Atkins Study, the final number of WPPs declared
consisted of a mix of cars parked in parking spaces, minus an estimate of how many
of these were fleet vehicles, plus estimates for buildings where car parks were not
visible.
The Nottingham City Council project team reviewed the Atkins Study results and
methodology against the successful methodology used when implementing the
Nottingham City Council WPL scheme and, more recently, when working with the
Leicester City Council WPL project team to estimate how many WPPs there may be
in the Leicester City Council administrative area.

5.3.2 Analysis/Critique

Nottingham City Council acknowledge that the Atkins methodology required significant
assumptions to be considered in order for a robust estimate to be derived for the
potential number of WPPs in a Bristol Central Core, Expanded Central Core and
Citywide scheme.
The survey that was conducted as part of the Atkins Study did not include any
engagement with employers. A limitation from this lack of engagement was being able
to accurately estimate the amount of parking spaces within a premise that are
attributed for fleet/operational purposes or customer usage. The survey was able to
estimate the amount of spaces designated for customer use at retail businesses,
however, in order to gather an accurate estimate of WPPs, it is essential to engage
with employers since they hold the necessary information. Furthermore, all
fleet/operational vehicles may not be easily identifiable within a car park. The
estimates do not consider behavioural patterns or any variance in the provisions of
WPPs at each premise, which a recommended OSPA will do.
A “feet on the ground” OSPA that factors in the concerns from the previous Atkins
Study will provide Bristol City Council with a detailed estimate of the potential number
of WPPs in the Bristol City Council administrative area along with data on the number
of employers, contact names, size of businesses, industries, etc. The data gathered
will assist the WPL Project Team with justification for the threshold when setting the
small employer discount.
Recommendation R15 – Conduct a “feet on the ground” OSPA that factors in any
questions from the previous Atkins Study
Additionally, the surveys were heavily based on business’ on-site car parks in the
Central Core. Although the majority of WPPs offered by employers will be on the same
site as the business premise, it is likely that some employers will hold contract parking
agreements with multi-storey and surface car park operators or have sites which are
jointly managed with other employers within the city centre area; this makes analysing
images and doing simple car counts ineffective for WPP estimations. The lack of clarity
on car parking spaces is shown by the large differences in the upper and lower
estimates for each scheme size, as shown in Table One below.

Page 185
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 27
Recommendation R16 – Identify and include any existing displaced commuter
parking counts in the WPP estimations (for example, on-street parking around
industrial estates)
Table One: Lower and Upper Estimates of WPPs in Bristol7

Scheme Size Lower Estimate Upper Estimate
Central Core 8,600 9,500
Expanded Central Core 10,000 15,000
Citywide 36,000 57,000

The Atkins Study methodology noted that it was unable to distinguish the number of
WPPs attributed to each employer within car parks for sites where there is multiple
employer occupancy.
A further key point to note is the lack of clarity as to whether the hospitals and
universities have been included in the count. In Nottingham, the NHS premises receive
a 100% discount from the WPL charge but are the largest provider of workplace
parking, therefore understanding whether the Atkins Study surveys included NHS sites
is essential.
The Atkins Study does not include any estimates for a reduction in employee parking.
Nottingham saw a reduction in workplace parking of around 16% when the WPL
scheme was introduced and the WPL charge was far lower than Bristol’s proposed
rate. It is important to understand the price elasticity of parking within Bristol to
determine what would be a suitable estimate for a reduction in parking demand, and
subsequently income.
Where spaces were not visible, the surveyors assumed that one parking space
occupied 25 square metres. The justification behind this assumed relationship is
unclear. Nottingham City Council’s experience would suggest that the assumption is
inaccurate since the car parks may not be marked and lined. It is highly likely that this
assumption will have led to some under and over-estimates in the prediction of WPPs.
The Atkins Study does not include a detailed breakdown of the sites that were
surveyed and audited. A review of the list of sites that were visited and cross-
referenced with VOA data would be recommended as a starting point in order to begin
categorising employers by size and industry.
In order to estimate how many WPPs Bristol may have, Nottingham City Council can
make use of their own real time data and predict the number of WPPs in the Bristol
City Council scheme area. The desktop model will use real experience to consider the
expected behaviour of businesses and commuters once a WPL scheme is
implemented. The desktop modelling technique can also be used to undertake
scenario testing such as the inclusion of NHS premises.

Page 186
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 28
Recommendation R17 – Review the list of sites visited by Atkins and cross-reference
with VOA data, in order to begin categorising employers by size and industry

5.3.3 Estimate on Potential Income

The Atkins Study calculated net revenue based on the estimated WPPs from the
surveys that were conducted. The net revenue was calculated on the basis of a charge
of £300 per WPP, which was in line with Nottingham’s charge of £288 in 2012. Inflation
was factored in and based on a Central Core scheme with a £300 per WPP charge,
the net revenue was estimated at £2 million - significantly short of the targeted £7
million per annum income target. Atkins also considered a £500 per WPP charge for
a Central Core scheme which would unlock the desired £100 million investment
package (~£7 million per annum), however there was significant concern regarding
the potential impact on local businesses and the burden the charge would place on
them.7
Early discussions held between the Nottingham City Council project team and Bristol
City Council officers indicated that a Central Core scheme is favoured.
Multi-storey car parks owned by Bristol City Council currently offer annual season
tickets ranging in price from £1,872-£2,496.16 The daily parking charge varies between
£10-£12 for Bristol City Council owned car parks and well-known private car parking
companies such as NCP.
In comparison to the market rate for parking within Bristol further analysis, potentially
in the shape of a survey, needs to be conducted to analyse the cost of all options
across the city that would be viable for motorists, to identify if the WPL cost is
reasonable, proportionate and will ensure the delivery of the WPL scheme objectives.
A survey should look to ask questions about commuters’ choices and future choices
dependent on set scenarios (i.e. implementation of a WPL scheme). The data
gathered from this survey would assist in determining a sustainable charge. Including
a survey question to ascertain the size and type of the business will help inform the
setting of a small employer discount threshold.
The cost of an annual First Bus Bristol Zone travel pass is £715.17 It will therefore be
important to take this into account when developing robust justification for the WPP
charge under an Expanded Central Core scheme. The WPL Project Team must justify
the charge by setting out Bristol City Council’s transport vision and the part a WPL
would play, e.g. influencing a modal shift in travel behaviour, reducing congestion,
improving air quality and funding more sustainable transport options as part of the
JLTP5.
Recommendation R18 – Conduct further research into the cost of parking provided
by private companies.

16 Car park annual season tickets and pre-paid tickets, Bristol.gov.uk – link
17 Bristol, Bath and the West Bus Ticket Prices – link

Page 187
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 29
Recommendation R19 – Conduct a survey in Stage One to further understand
commuter behaviour across the Bristol region

5.3.4 Discount Level
At the request of Bristol City Council, the Nottingham City Council project team have
also looked into the potential small employer discount threshold which Bristol City
Council could introduce as part of their WPL scheme. The Atkins Study modelled the
implementation of a small employer discount threshold for employers with ten or less
WPPs, based on Nottingham’s WPL scheme. Although the datasets and employers
were cross-referenced with the VOA database, it is unknown exactly what detail Atkins
obtained as the Nottingham City Council project team have not seen the actual
database which Atkins compiled from the survey. To accurately understand the
appropriate discount level that Bristol City Council should consider, it will be important
to review the original datasets collected by Atkins in order to identify gaps that need
to be covered ahead of a more up to date analysis and estimation of WPPs.
A review of the size of businesses in Bristol based on data from the Office for National
Statistics shows that not only is there a larger number of smaller businesses in Bristol,
they also account for a slightly larger proportion of businesses in comparison with
Nottingham. In Nottingham, 78% of businesses have less than 10 employees whereas
in Bristol, the figure is 81.5%.14 A difference of 3.5% may not seem particularly large,
however the number of businesses in Bristol is nearly twice that of Nottingham (22,780
vs 11,970). Numbers of employees does influence the number of WPPs a business
licenses for. It is worthy of note that despite Bristol having nearly 11,000 more
businesses than Nottingham, there are 255 more businesses in Bristol with over 50
employers, than in Nottingham.18 Table Two shows the comparison between business
sizes in Bristol and Nottingham.
Table Two: Comparison of Business Size – Bristol v Nottingham19

Business Bristol Bristol Nottingham Nottingham
Size (Number) (% of total) (Number) (% of total)
Micro (0-9) 18,560 81.5% 9,340 78.0%
Small (10-
3,350 14.7% 2,015 16.8%
49)
Medium
750 3.3% 535 4.5%
(50-249)
Large
120 0.5% 80 0.7%
(250+)

18 NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics, Nottingham - link
19 NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics, Bristol - link; NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics, Nottingham -

link

Page 188
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 30
The proposed Bristol WPL scheme is a Central Core scheme and this area is
understood to be heavily office based with predominantly professional/administrative
industries located around the city centre. The NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics
for Bristol suggests that around 40% of industries (J, K, L, M, N and P in the referenced
dataset) in Bristol could be categorised as office based and it would be reasonable to
assume the majority of these are located within the Central Core.19 If this assumption
is true then it would be reasonable to suggest to Bristol City Council that a lower small
employer discount threshold should be considered for their WPL scheme.
The results gathered in the Atkins Study show significant variance between the upper
and lower estimates both with (Table Three) and without (Table One) the small
employer discount threshold. The large range of variation in the estimates reinforces
the need for new, targeted parking studies to be conducted in order for more accurate
data to be gathered and to be used to form the basis of financial modelling for a WPL
scheme.
Table Three: Lower and Upper Estimates of WPPs After a 10 Place Small Employer
Discount Threshold in Bristol7

Scheme Size Lower Estimate Upper Estimate
Central Core 7,600 8,700
Expanded Central Core 12,100 17,400
Citywide 27,200 49,700

Page 189
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 31
5.4 Governance and Project Team Structure

5.4.1 Introduction

The Governance and Project Team Structure is outlined in Appendix F. The chart
demonstrates the range of roles and resources that are required to deliver Stage One
of the WPL Route Map. The majority of these roles will not need to be permanent posts
but it is essential that experienced lead officers are identified and allowed sufficient
time to be fully briefed on the proposed Bristol City Council WPL scheme details.
Furthermore, the officers’ roles and their responsibilities regarding the delivery of
Stage One must be discussed and confirmed as appropriate for a project of this scale
and complexity.
Bristol City Council will need to decide whether to resource internally or externally for
the WPL Project Team roles. The initial discussions that Nottingham City Council held
with the Bristol City Council management team has led to the production of the
Governance and Project Team Structure. However, it may be necessary to amend this
structure as the project progresses if resource availability, experience and/or
requirements change.

5.4.2 Governance

Best practice with any large-scale and complex project is to have the right governance
structures in place to manage and support the work being undertaken. An effective
governance structure will enable efficient management and decision making to support
the delivery of the WPL Route Map.
A clear governance structure ensures that key leadership roles are in place to control
Bristol City Council’s commitment and resources to successfully deliver a WPL
scheme. Clearly setting out the levels of decision making and accountability will allow
effective management to be in place at all levels of the project. The formation of a
good project structure provides guidance, direction and performance management as
part of the supporting project processes.

Project governance also formalises the “what if” scenarios pertaining to issue
management (e.g. budget restrictions, unforeseen project events, scope creep, etc.)
and decision management. It will resolve the uncertainties of “who can decide what”
in a project environment and is intended to clarify the roles and responsibilities of all
project members.
Every project needs clear leadership and the concept of a single point of accountability
is a key part of effective project governance. The right people must be made
accountable and endorsed/empowered by senior management to hold sufficient
authority within the organisation, so they can effectively deliver.

Page 190
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 32
5.4.3 Governance Team Structure

The governance structure has been populated after workshop discussions with
relevant teams at Bristol City Council and Nottingham City Council, utilising lessons
learnt and experience from Nottingham’s scheme delivery. The structure has then
been tailored for Bristol City Council based on their own governance policy. The
structure sets out the “chain of command” that will allow for swift decision making by
officers across Bristol City Council.
Bristol Transport Board
The Bristol Transport Board has been created to oversee the delivery and
implementation of Bristol’s Transport Strategy and is one of six bodies working
towards the delivery of the One City Plan.
The Bristol Transport Board consists of senior stakeholders across Bristol, the WECA
and relevant transport groups. The Board meet on a quarterly basis but should also
meet at key stages and decision points throughout the WPL project.
The Bristol Transport Board would be provided with regular updates on the delivery of
the WPL project, the scheme design, high level risks and mitigation options. The Board
would also be asked to review and approve key policy decisions and provide guidance
on issue resolution. The Board would provide direction to ensure that the WPL Project
Team is resourced, supported and held accountable for delivery.
WPL Steering Group
The WPL Steering Group would be chaired by the relevant Director with overall
accountability for the WPL project delivery. The Director would be supported by the
Lead Manager and WPL Project Manager. Identifying other members of the Steering
Group is flexible as people will be required at different stages and key points. Steering
Group members should be of an appropriate level so that the respective services are
effectively represented.
The Steering Group would follow a set agenda, meet six weekly and be focused on
project management delivery and issue resolution; they would also review progress
on all relevant WPL workstreams contained within the WPL Route Map and undertake
the necessary due diligence to take key decisions and preferred options to the Bristol
Transport Board for their review and approval.

5.4.4 WPL Project Team

The following recommended WPL Project Team is based on Nottingham City Council’s
own WPL project and lessons learnt. Across the stages various individuals with
specialist backgrounds will be required. For consistency,it is important that the project
is directed by an experienced project manager who is supported by
officers/coordinators who are committed and focussed solely on the delivery of the

Page 191
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 33
WPL project. It is essential that the WPL project is a major focus of those on the WPL
Project Team due to the size and nature of the scheme.

5.4.5 Internal (Bristol City Council) WPL Project Team Structure

Lead Manager
The Lead Manager will have direct responsibility for the delivery of the WPL Route
Map and managing the project management resources. They will report directly to the
Director responsible for the WPL Steering Group and their role will be to remove any
unnecessary delays to decision making outside of the governance meetings.
Project Manager
An experienced Project Manager should be assigned to this key role as they will be
responsible for the management and delivery of the day-to-day project and the
resources allocated to them. All relevant supporting project management processes,
procedures and documentation will be managed by this role.
Project Support Officer
Project support will need to be flexible and allocated as required to ensure that there
is the right level of support, capacity and experience available to the Project Manager
throughout delivery of the project.
WPL Package Lead Officer
The WPL OBC is the key output to be produced in Stage One of the WPL Route Map
and it will focus heavily on the proposed benefits of the delivery of a range of JLTP
and One City Plan policies and objectives, predominantly delivering a step change in
public transport infrastructure and services and the resulting outcomes and benefits
that these will achieve (the WPL Package). It is recommended that, for clarity, a single
point of contact is identified and leads on coordinating the development of the separate
elements that will make up the WPL Package. The WPL Package Lead Officer will
need to liaise with all relevant associated services, such as public transport and
transport strategy.
Economic Development Lead
Understanding and evidencing the risks and opportunities for the impact of a WPL
scheme for Bristol City Council in terms of its economy is key. A leading officer from
the economic development team contributing to the current and future visions for the
city in terms of jobs, growth, inward investment and business needs, is a major
component of the OBC. The officer will bring valuable insight into business viewpoints
and pressures that will form a key input into the Stakeholder Management Strategy
and Communications Plan and can facilitate early and sustained engagement with the
business community.

Page 192
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 34
JLTP Lead
The WPL revenue is ring-fenced for the delivery of JLTP and One City Plan policies
and objectives, so having a lead officer who can ensure that the WPL is clearly linked
to these policies is vital. The JLTP Lead’s ability to look for opportunities to link into
wider policies and objectives for the city, other than just transport, will also strengthen
the OBC and ensure that it remains up to date and integrated with emerging
government policy.
Legal Services Lead
Although external legal support will be required, it is recommended that Bristol City
Council allocate an internal legal resource who can ensure compliance with both
internal and external legal processes and mitigate risk. The ability to have internal and
external legal support enables a more robust check and challenge of key elements of
the design of the WPL scheme, especially in the early stages, to ensure that the basis
of the scheme is legally sound and risk mitigation is robust and evidenced based.
Procurement Lead
An officer from the procurement team will lead and advise on the appropriate
procurement options for smooth delivery of the specification, tendering and
procurement of external resources, while minimising unnecessary delays and
ensuring compliance with relevant internal procedures and procurement legislation,
e.g. Official Journal of the European Union requirements.
Finance Lead
An internal finance lead will be required to ensure that the necessary funding and
expenditure processes and procedures are in place to establish the WPL Project Team
and guarantee that financial regulations are complied with as part of project delivery.
The Finance Lead will also input into the financial modelling workstreams, by providing
source data and internal quality assurance that the financial business case
assumptions are robust and that expenditure and income assumptions are managed
at the appropriate level of risk.
Information Governance and Risk
With a project of this nature, Nottingham City Council would expect assignment of an
officer from the Information Governance and Risk team, as it is important that the
project is GDPR compliant at all stages.
Communications Officer(s)
The Communications Officer is a key role in order to establish a clear strategy for
managing stakeholders and delivering the appropriate communications messages and
campaigns during WPL Route Map delivery. Communications Officers will also initiate
early informal engagement, capturing any responses to inform the future Stakeholder
Management Strategy and Communications Plan. They will also be required to set out

Page 193
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 35
key messages and briefings for internal and external officers, along with proactively
and reactively managing the media interest and engagement throughout the various
stages of project delivery.

5.4.6 External (non-Bristol City Council) Project Team Structure

The following roles are expected to be provided by external consultants, as these are
highly specialised roles and will need to be called upon as and when required.
Project Management
Assigning the right level of experienced project management resource and the
necessary project support in a timely manner will play a major part in ensuring Bristol
City Council’s readiness to commence the delivery of Stage One of the WPL Route
Map. It will be necessary to undertake a clear programme of knowledge transfer to this
team, to enable them to coordinate and initiate the production of all relevant
documentation, processes and procedures that will be required to manage a project
of this scale and complexity and make best use of resources to deliver on time, cost
and quality.
Nottingham City Council WPL Support
Nottingham City Council have invaluable knowledge and experience regarding how to
design, deliver and operate a WPL scheme since they are the first (and only) UK
authority to be operating a scheme of this type. Nottingham City Council will be able
to apply its expert knowledge and experience to tailor a support package across a
range of aspects of WPL delivery to suit the requirements of Bristol City Council.
The support offered would prove invaluable in reducing cost, time and risk associated
with the development of Bristol City Council’s own WPL scheme by following a proven
methodology and incorporating lessons learnt. The high value associated with Bristol’s
WPL scheme means that delivering the scheme a year early would be worth £7 million
to Bristol City Council, or £800,000 per month. Further, the political and reputational
benefits of delivering an effective scheme in a timely manner are innumerable.
Parliamentary Agents
It will be necessary to assign appropriately experienced and resourced Parliamentary
Agents to ensure that the tailored WPL scheme for Bristol City Council is fully
compliant with current and emerging government legislation and any risks or issues
are evidenced and mitigated, to ensure a ratified and legally robust proposal is
delivered. These agents will also work in partnership with the Bristol City Council Legal
Services Lead identified above.
Economic Consultants
Economic modelling and studies will be required to build upon existing work in order
to identify and support the proposed impacts of congestion on Bristol’s economy, along

Page 194
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 36
with what benefits the WPL scheme and WPL Package will have. These studies and
subsequent findings will be a key component of evidence to support the WPL OBC
and the justification for why a WPL scheme is the right choice for Bristol City Council
to deliver their future strategic vision for Bristol.
Transport Consultants
Transport Consultants will be required to model and evidence the future predicted
peak congestion levels and types (commuter, through traffic, residential, retail, leisure,
etc.) for Bristol and the surrounding conurbation, in addition to assessing the impacts
this will have on the city, its citizens and the local economy. It will then be necessary
to model the range of options along with the positive impacts that will be expected to
be delivered as part of the WPL Package. The transport modelling work will need to
be completed in partnership with the relevant economic modelling to show a robust
case for how the WPL provides a vital contribution towards delivering the future vision
for the city. It will also be important to include relevant social impact studies as part of
these works.
Business Improvement Districts and Business Forum
These are groups of key stakeholders identified by Bristol City Council, who will be
kept up to date with regular communications on how the WPL scheme is progressing
and will be an essential source of early feedback from the business community
regarding Bristol City Council’s proposed WPL plans.
The proposed Governance and Project Team Structure will ensure that Bristol’s WPL
scheme is delivered on time, at low cost and with risks mitigated and removed where
possible. As the project moves into Stage Three, a well-rounded project team and
clear governance strategy will mean that businesses are prepared and willing to
licence and ensure that Bristol’s WPL scheme is implemented effectively.
Recommendation R20 – Follow the Governance and Project Team Structure outlined
in Appendix F and Section 5.4

Page 195
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 37
5.5 Stakeholder Management Strategy and
Communications Plan

A Stakeholder Management Strategy and accompanying Communications Plan will
be key requirements in order to deliver a Bristol City Council WPL scheme as
effectively as possible. The main objectives will be:

• To ensure that appropriate stakeholders are identified and regularly updated
throughout the development of the project
• To engage with stakeholders to promote support for the WPL scheme
• To proactively manage the relationship of the project with stakeholders
throughout the project lifecycle, including the development and implementation
stages
• To ensure that all enquiries and concerns raised by the stakeholders are
recorded, reviewed and responded to as appropriate, in a timely and effective
manner

5.5.1 Stakeholder Management Strategy

Principles

Stakeholder management is the systematic identification, analysis and planning of
actions to communicate with, negotiate with and influence stakeholders. Stakeholders
are all those who have an interest or role in the project or are impacted by the project.
Effective stakeholder management is critical to a WPL scheme throughout all stages,
as stakeholders will have influence over the criteria by which the scheme’s success
will be judged.

One of the leading causes of project failure is insufficient involvement of key
stakeholders; this section seeks to identify, examine and understand the different
stakeholders for this project and explore their importance, in order to outline a process
for effective stakeholder management and communication.
The Stakeholder Radar (Appendix G) and the 2x2 Power/Influence by Interest in WPL
Matrix (Appendix H) are diagrams that provide an illustration of:

• Who the stakeholders are
• What segment they belong to
• The influence they possess
• The interest the stakeholders are likely to have in the implementation of
the WPL scheme
• The frequency and type of communication that will be required to ensure
that these stakeholders are fully engaged with the project

Page 196
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 38
Communication will play a vital role in the success of this project and processes must
be in place to ensure the timely and appropriate generation, collection and
dissemination of key information throughout all stages of project delivery.
Stakeholder Appendices
The Stakeholder Radar provides an understanding of the different methods and
frequency of communication that each stakeholder layer and domain will require.
The Stakeholder Radar forms the basis for the different messages that need to be
communicated to each stakeholder, depending on the layer and segment they are
located in. Tailoring messages specific to each stakeholder group will ensure that the
interest levels held by stakeholders remain high. For example, stakeholders within the
Governance domain will require more detailed engagement and communication
regarding the overall WPL project, whereas communication with stakeholders within
the Customer domain should look to emphasise how the WPL Package will benefit
them. The Stakeholder Radar can assist the formation of a Stakeholder Management
Strategy and Communications Plan by the designated Communications Officer.
The 2x2 Power/Influence by Interest in WPL Project Matrix allows each stakeholder to
be seen in terms of their power/influence over the proposed WPL scheme and their
interest in the WPL project.
Identification of Stakeholders
Stakeholder management begins with the identification of all stakeholders who should
be involved in, or who will be affected by, the project once Stage One of the WPL
Route Map is initiated.
The process began with officers from the Nottingham City Council project team plotting
generic stakeholders onto the Stakeholder Radar. The Stakeholder Radar was then
reviewed further and updated at a workshop with Bristol City Council’s Head of City
Transport and Principal Transport Planner, to identify stakeholder groups that are
unique to the Bristol scheme. The updated Stakeholder Radar has also been reviewed
by Bristol City Council’s communications experts. The Stakeholder Radar agreed with
the Engagement and Active Travel Team Manager from Bristol City Council is now
attached at Appendix G.
The Stakeholder Radar has been segmented into four domains:

• Governance
• Customers
• Stakeholders
• Influencers
Four layers to the Stakeholder Radar then assist with prioritising each domain:
1. V = Vital to engage

Page 197
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 39
2. N = Necessary to engage with
3. G = Good to have engaged
4. C = Courtesy to inform

The closer the stakeholders are to the centre of the Stakeholder Radar, the more
important communication with them is.
The WPL Route Map assists with understanding when it will be important to
communicate with stakeholders within each layer of the Stakeholder Radar. During
Stage One, it is recommended to prioritise engaging with stakeholders in layers V and
N. The stakeholders within these groups will be pivotal to the project and will be key
decision makers. As the project develops and progresses to Stage Two and Stage
Three, engagement and communication with stakeholders in layers G and C will take
place. The Stakeholder Radar is a dynamic document and should be updated as the
project progresses and new stakeholders emerge.
So that stakeholders can be efficiently managed, the stakeholder domains are defined
as follows:

1. Governance – Includes the key leaders and decision makers within Bristol
City Council who have the power to shape the WPL project. From political
figures who will be key figureheads for the endorsement of a WPL scheme
in Bristol through to Bristol City Council officers who will be responsible for
overseeing the development, implementation and eventual operation of a
Bristol WPL scheme

2. Customer – Includes the groups that will be subject to compliance with the
WPL scheme once it has been implemented. It will be vital to engage with
the businesses who are expected to provide the highest number of LWPPs
(including the NHS, although a decision will need to be made as to whether
or not NHS premises will be liable for the WPL charge) and stakeholders
representing smaller businesses who will hold fewer LWPPs per business
but will form an essential part of Bristol’s WPL scheme. The scheme area in
Bristol is currently undetermined - confirming the potential charging area will
be a key workstream in Stage One and will then allow a more definitive list
of Customer stakeholders to be produced. It will be important to engage with
the Customer stakeholder group and highlight the benefits of a WPL scheme
in terms of air quality improvement and constraints to congestion growth. It
will also be important to communicate the WPL Package that will be funded
by the WPL revenue and how it will benefit the city and these Customers

3. Stakeholders – Includes the groups and individuals that will actually
provide the resources, infrastructure and decision making for the
implementation of the WPL Package. It will be vital to engage with the One
City Transport Board which was created in 2019 to manage the

Page 198
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 40
implementation and delivery of Bristol’s transport strategy. The WPL
revenue is expected to be used to upgrade the bus network in Bristol with
sustainable buses, new park and ride routes and safer active travel
infrastructure to encourage more journeys via cycling and walking. It will
therefore be important to engage with the Public Transport Operators and
those involved in delivering the infrastructure. Legally, it is necessary to
obtain approval for the JLTP from the DfT. It is therefore important that there
is engagement with the JLTP team to ensure the WPL Package assists in
delivering the JLTP objectives

4. Influencers – Includes the stakeholders who will be influential but will not
be key decision makers for a WPL scheme in Bristol. Influencers all have
the power to influence larger groups, as illustrated in the Stakeholder Radar.
Additionally, with the aim of constraining congestion growth and improving
air quality, it is likely that environmental organisations and groups will
support the WPL scheme, therefore communication with these bodies will
be important once Stage One begins. It is important that effective
communication highlights the benefits of a WPL scheme to these
stakeholders in order to reduce scepticism and opposition to the project,
therefore reducing the risk. As the project progresses from Stage One
towards Stage Two and Stage Three, engagement with the stakeholders
listed in groups G and C on the Stakeholder Radar will be required.

Responsibility for Stakeholder Management
The governance of stakeholder engagement will be the responsibility of the WPL
Steering Group (see Appendix F). The WPL Steering Group should allocate
management responsibility based on those who are best placed and skilled to manage
a particular stakeholder engagement process, reflecting the nature and importance of
the stakeholder interest. Those with a strategic interest tend to be best served
corporately by the council and the WPL Steering Group, while those with a specific
project interest are generally best served by the relevant resource(s) within the Bristol
City Council WPL Project Team. Section 5.4 outlines the detail around the Governance
and Project Team Structure.
Stakeholder management and the allocation of responsibility will be an ongoing
process throughout the project’s lifecycle.
Stakeholder Engagement

The objectives of the engagement process will be to keep key stakeholders’
knowledge and commitment high by ensuring that they are informed at the right stages
and provided with correct, clear and consistent information throughout the WPL
project. Clear communication will ensure that expectations are consistent and in line
with deliverables.

Page 199
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 41
The development of a Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan
will assist in determining what will be communicated, how it will be communicated, by
when, and by whom, in order to manage Bristol City Council’s readiness to commence
delivery of Stage One of the WPL Route Map.

The questions to consider for each stakeholder are:

• What will be the objectives of each engagement/communication?
• What will be the key messages?
• What information will be communicated and by whom?
• When will information be disseminated and what will be the appropriate
timing?
• What information will be provided and to what level of detail?
• What mechanisms will be used to disseminate information?
• How will feedback be encouraged and what will be done as a result of
feedback?

5.5.2 Communications Plan

The following section looks at the type and frequency of the communication activities
and messages that will be required for each stakeholder group.

In developing the Communications Plan, the Nottingham City Council project team
have considered the potential issues that could pose a threat to the project (e.g.
employers refusing to comply, employees who drive, motorists’ groups, etc.) or provide
support to a WPL (e.g. environmental groups, political support, etc.). The WPL scheme
is still a relatively new idea for those involved and therefore early engagement with
stakeholders will be key to identifying reactions and attitudes, which can then inform
the development of an approach to manage them effectively.

The prospective WPL is a charge for off street parking that will generate funding for
strategic transport projects in order to tackle congestion and provide better
accessibility to all citywide. It is important that stakeholders’ reactions and attitudes to
a WPL scheme are identified as part of Stage One so that the right communication
approaches can be applied throughout the WPL Route Map and that the benefits are
relayed in a targeted manner.

The over-arching intentions of the Communications Plan are to:

• Highlight the justifications for implementing a WPL scheme
• Emphasise the positive aspects of the WPL scheme
• Show how the WPL scheme forms part of the wider strategic vision for
Bristol (The One City Plan, CRSTS, CAZ, JLTP, etc.)

Page 200
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 42
The rest of the section will focus on some of the key components of the
Communications Plan and illustrates the key considerations which are necessary in
order to gain support for a WPL. The components listed below will be a critical part of
the Communications Plan as they will help shape the messages for the informal
engagement phase (WS1.4) and the public consultation phase (WS2.2).

WPL Spokespeople and Figureheads
The WPL scheme is contentious and there will invariably be strong opposition from
some stakeholder groups. Political leaders will need to be resolute and a strong
leadership figure at the forefront of the project will be a critical success factor, as they
will be recognised publicly as leading the WPL scheme.
The Need for a WPL
The message as to why a WPL scheme is necessary in Bristol must be clear. All
communication strategies and messaging should emphasise the WPL scheme’s
importance in addressing Bristol’s air quality and congestion issues and delivering the
One City Plan. The communications must focus on why the WPL scheme is being
considered, with key messages including that the scheme:

• Targets peak periods of congestion, commuter traffic and air quality
• Does not rely on complex technology - it is a licensing scheme and is
therefore accessible with low-time commitment from businesses
• Will aim to improve air quality and tackle congestion through investment in
sustainable modes of public transport
• Forms part of the wider JLTP plan
• Has both low upfront and running costs

Transport Funding
In a bid to tackle air quality problems, a CAZ is set to be put in place in summer 2022.
It is expected that the introduction of a CAZ will allow Bristol to be compliant with the
national air quality limits.
The follow up to the TCF2 is the CRSTS, with bids for grants being submitted by 2023.
A successful bid could see Bristol City Council being awarded a grant for additional air
quality and congestion tackling measures. It will be necessary to monitor such bids
and liaise with teams responsible for them in order to factor in how the ICTF funding
links in with a WPL scheme. This will ensure that stakeholders and the wider
conurbation understand that grant money further supports the WPL Package, as
opposed to providing revenue to implement the WPL Package.
The income generated by a Bristol WPL scheme would be ring-fenced as part of the
JLTP5 to improve and create a high quality and affordable public transport network
that is accessible around the city. Clarity on the scope to which the WPL funds JLTP5

Page 201
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 43
projects and where the other funding is being sourced from will be needed so that
communications regarding the use of WPL income are relevant and consistent.
Environmental and Sustainability Issues
Bristol City Council have set a target to become a carbon neutral authority by 2025
and make Bristol a carbon neutral city by 2030. Tackling poor air quality is high on
Bristol City Council’s agenda. The WPL and the WPL Package will assist in achieving
the air quality targets set out in the One City Plan.
Traffic congestion is a significant problem in Bristol, as it is in other major UK cities.
Climate change, health and other environmental concerns currently feature strongly in
international, national and local media, more so than at the time of the development
and implementation of Nottingham’s WPL scheme. For instance, particulate matter is
becoming a major issue for cities; this is an even greater issue in areas of high
congestion where higher levels of particulate matter are caused from braking and
tyres.
Therefore, there should be an emphasis on the role that a WPL scheme plays in
constraining congestion growth, the scheme’s consequential air quality impacts and
the associated health benefits.
Communications Approach and Brand
The tone of WPL communications activity needs to be energetic and determined.
Communications should emphasise how the city is ambitious to move forward and
how the WPL scheme forms part of the overarching vision for the future of transport in
Bristol. Messages need to communicate that this forward momentum is a partnership
approach and businesses need to engage if Bristol is to prosper as a city. The One
City Plan provides the connection between the WPL scheme, the transport
improvements and the wider regeneration of Bristol and this will be beneficial to
continually demonstrate.
Communications activities need to be “human” – they should have
faces/spokespeople, as this approach is recognised as being more effective at
reducing business “mistrust” when contrasted with “faceless” activities such as
promotional literature or websites.
The use of public transport and active travel options are currently being promoted as
a substitute to driving into work in order to improve air quality and constrain congestion
growth, therefore the various Bristol transport organisations are key stakeholders in
the WPL project. Early communications must look to promote the use and expansion
of these services into the high-quality transport and active travel infrastructure that is
envisioned to be delivered as part of the WPL Package.
It is recommended that Bristol’s WPL should have specific branding, while still clearly
being linked to Bristol City Council and reflecting the wider development of Bristol.
Independent branding will ensure that communications are immediately linked with the

Page 202
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 44
WPL rather than other messages from Bristol City Council and the branding can then
be used on items from the WPL Package which have been funded from the WPL,
ensuring that businesses and residents within Bristol clearly see the benefits of the
scheme. The visual brand for the WPL scheme is still to be developed, however it
should be adaptable in order to reflect the varying preferences of the key stakeholders
in this project.
Key Messages
The details regarding the WPL Package are yet to be agreed, so the key messages
will need to be developed as decisions are finalised. The key messages should target
the particular preferences of target stakeholder groups and fit with the specific
communications channels being employed.
How the WPL Works
The details of the how the WPL scheme operates will be developed as part of Stage
One of the WPL Route Map and will form a key element of later communications.
These messages will become more important as the interest grows in the WPL project,
and as stakeholders start to request practical details regarding the scheme’s operation
and how it will impact upon them.

5.5.3 Communications Responsibilities

Bristol City Council Transport Communications Team
The Governance and Project Team Structure recommends a dedicated
communications resource who will hold primary responsibility for all communications,
planning, management and delivery. The communications role will include:

• Drafting and reviewing communications documents and briefing notes
• Planning and managing key communications events
• Proactive and reactive WPL communications
• Organising media and engagement campaigns
• Measuring and reporting on the effectiveness of communications activity
• Briefing key Bristol City Council representatives on the key messages and
Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan for the
project

Mayor, Bristol City Council Leaders, Councillors and other Figureheads

A proposed WPL scheme needs figureheads and spokespeople to positively influence
businesses and the public through both informal and formal communication methods.
Key responsibilities for these individuals would include:

Page 203
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 45
• Public communication - through media interviews, additional communication
modes and sponsoring and promoting the WPL scheme using an agreed
core script
• Attending forums and meetings with key businesses affected in order to
promote the WPL scheme.
• The consistent and reliable delivery of agreed key project messages through
more informal means, such as at business networking events and
conferences

Recommendation R21 – Create a Stakeholder Management Strategy and
Communications Plan to identify stakeholders and ensure that their interest levels are
maintained or increased

Page 204
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 46
5.6 Risk Analysis for Bristol City Council’s Readiness to
Progress Ahead of Stage One

5.6.1 Introduction to Project Risk Management

The following section documents the way in which risk management policy and risk
registers are implemented and managed. The purpose of this section is to assist
project and programme sponsors, project boards and project managers and aid
implementation decisions by enabling effective identification, management and
communication of project risks.

5.6.2 What is Project Risk Management?

Project risk management is the process concerned with identifying, assessing and
responding to project risks and it provides a disciplined environment for informed and
proactive decision making. The objectives of project risk management are to inform
decision making during project selection and definition, as well as improving project
performance during design and delivery. Adherence to project management principles
will assist the successful delivery of projects and lead to enhanced organisational
performance; it will also ensure that business objectives are delivered within the
agreed scope, quality, time and cost constraints.

Risk management forms an integral part of the project management strategy and is
essential in delivering a successful project. The management of risk needs to be fully
embedded into the delivery of a project and forms a key responsibility of the Bristol
City Council WPL Project Manager’s role.
If the WPL project is to be a success, risk management must be conducted and
integrated into the project management process from the start of the project. It is then
important to ensure risk management is upheld throughout the project lifecycle.

5.6.3 Issue Management versus Risk Management

A project issue is anything that can have an impact on a project (either detrimental or
beneficial) and is separate to risk management. Risks that have or will materialise are
no longer risks, they are issues. Issues can arise from a wide range of sources, they
can come in many forms and can occur at any point in the project life cycle. Issues
need to be dealt with as they arise and once identified, need to be captured in the
Change Consent and Issue Log for the project and the Risk Issue Template, as well
as being monitored on an ongoing basis. The impact and seriousness of the project
issues should be evaluated and assessed with any alternative actions that need to be
taken identified. The WPL Project Manager is responsible for managing and checking
the issue log alongside the Risk Register.

Page 205
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 47
5.6.4 Opportunities and Threats

Positive events (opportunities) as well as negative events (threats) need to be
considered when performing project risk management activities. If we consider only
threats when managing a project, then the best that can be expected is to meet the
promised objectives but never improve upon them. If there is an understanding of the
positives and negatives of all the factors that could have an impact on the project, then
the probability of success will increase. It would also reduce the potential for failure
along with any uncertainty of achieving the benefits required.

5.6.5 Risk Considerations in the Proposal and Approval Phase

The most significant project risks, particularly those that threaten the outcomes of a
project, are identifiable in this phase. For new projects, the risk management process
should be commenced at the outset with key risks being captured as part of the start-
up process. During project initiation (Stage One), a risk management strategy for the
project, including defining how risks will be handled during the lifecycle of the project,
should be established.

As risks are identified and assessed, they will be captured in the Risk Register together
with the planned risk mitigation, once these have been agreed. The owner of the risk
should be the manager of the risk management response and it is their responsibility
to execute and manage the agreed response.

5.6.6 Project Risk Management Process

The process described in this section uses six steps:

5.6.7 Methodology

With a project as complex as a WPL scheme, it is imperative that key risks are
identified and mitigated as far as it is reasonably practicable in order to properly inform
and reassure key stakeholders.

Page 206
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 48
In order to compile a Risk Register for Bristol City Council’s readiness to enter the
Stage One development phase of the WPL Route Map, the Nottingham City Council
project team extensively reviewed corresponding risk documents upheld following part
of their scheme implementation. These documents provide a robust starting point for
this risk identification and analysis exercise for the Bristol City Council WPL project.
A list describing constituent risks and the perceived threat level has been compiled
using the matrix below:

Initially, relevant risks were identified by Nottingham City Council and a Risk Register
was drafted, however mitigation activities were not allocated at this early stage.
Following further development, the Risk Register was shared with key officers at
Bristol City Council who were invited to comment ahead of a risk management
workshop. On 16th July 2021, a risk management workshop was conducted with
officers from Bristol City Council and each individual risk was collectively discussed
with input of the local expert knowledge of the Bristol City Council environment by
these colleagues. New risks emerged that were captured, analysed and subsequently
added to the Risk Register.
As part of the discussion with Bristol City Council, mitigation options were suggested,
discussed, rationalised and further developed. The mitigation measures were
subsequently scored and RAG rated, the risks were then allocated owners and this
was then captured in an updated version of the Risk Register.
Risk registers are dynamic in nature and evolve throughout a project. It will be a priority
to create a full Risk Register for Stage One once approval is received to commit
budgets and resources to the delivery of the WPL Route Map along with the
recruitment of the Bristol City Council WPL Project Team. Further risk registers will be

Page 207
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 49
required for the later stages throughout the WPL project. The current version of the
Risk Register is attached at Appendix I.

5.6.8 Summary of Risk Analysis

In total, 33 risks were identified that were relevant to Bristol City Council in terms of
their readiness to commence Stage One of the WPL Route Map.
Of the 33 risks, 11 were identified as red (high) risks and these should be prioritised
for early mitigation.
A further 17 risks were rated as amber (medium) and mitigation and/or close
management and monitoring is recommended.
The Red and Amber risks are categorised as follows:
Political Climate
Red risks 1 and 2 relate to the political situation affecting the country as a result
of Brexit, which could impact upon Bristol City Council’s WPL proposals and
timescales.
Amber risks 4 and 5 are JTLP related and risk 7 considers the “Levelling Up”
agenda and how, as it is not aimed at Bristol, it may impact on transport
initiatives.
Project Resources
Red risks 8 and 9 and amber risks 10, 12 and 13 pertain to the need for Bristol
City Council to understand the scale of developing a WPL scheme and secure
the relevant approvals and subsequent allocation or recruitment of the Bristol
City Council WPL Project Team in a timely fashion. These risks refer to both
internal and external resources, including specialists, which will be key to Bristol
City Council being ready to commence the Stage One activities contained in
the WPL Route Map.
Communications
There are no red risks and the main amber risks reference the critical need for
all aspects of the communications around the WPL proposals to be cohesive
and consistent, including the need for engagement with key figureheads and
dedicated communications resources.
Adherence to the Nottingham Model
Red risk 22 identifies to need to communicate Nottingham City Council’s
Feasibility Study Report to key officers and politicians.
Amber risk 21 refers to the need to follow the fundamental building blocks of
Nottingham City Council's WPL scheme to reduce the risk of legal challenge,

Page 208
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 50
deliver value for money and minimise potential delays to the delivery timescales
which would affect the 2024 target delivery date.
COVID-19
There are 4 red risks in this category, 23, 24, 26 and 28, and collectively they
highlight the unknowns in terms of what the “new normal” will look like in terms
of commuting and public transport patronage and the requirement to monitor
these behaviours to determine what impact they may have on a future WPL
scheme.
Other risks that are not referenced above are categorised as:
Amber risks 29 and 32 cite the WECA’s Bus Service Improvement Plan and
initial intention to focus on the Central Core area as positive reasons for
developing and introducing a WPL scheme.
Red risk 33 emphasises the need to monitor the Secretary of State for
Transport’s response to Leicester City Council’s FBC and proposal to
implement a WPL scheme in their city
If Bristol City Council’s ambitious scheme delivery date of 2024 is to be achieved, then
early risk mitigation is recommended to address the risks identified in the Risk
Register.
Successful mitigation of these risks will ensure Bristol City Council commence the
delivery of Stage One of the WPL Route Map in a timely manner, that is robust in all
aspects.
Recommendation R22 – Monitor and regularly update the dynamic Risk Register
document, with risks that are dealt with being closed, new risks being identified as the
scheme develops and adequate mitigation implemented

Page 209
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 51
6.0 Conclusion and Recommendations for Action

Nottingham City Council has conducted a thorough assessment on the readiness of
Bristol City Council to develop and implement a WPL scheme. The results of that
assessment have been outlined in this Feasibility Study Report.

It is clear that Bristol City Council has an ambitious vision and a clear strategy on how
to achieve this. In particular, Bristol City Council aim to make Bristol a carbon neutral
city by 2030. To achieve this ambitious vision, it is imperative that the transport projects
receive sufficient funding to enable effective implementation and to ensure that they
are of the scale required by the ambition.

Nottingham City Council would also like to highlight the extensive amount of
supporting studies, data and in-depth information already available to Bristol City
Council; this information will positively contribute to the development of a robust WPL
OBC, which will be the key output should Bristol embark upon Stage One of the WPL
Route Map.

For Bristol City Council to achieve a “go live” date of October 2024 for a WPL scheme,
it is essential that the momentum of the past six months is maintained and the WPL
Route Map is initiated.
Ahead of commencing Stage One of the WPL Route Map, the Nottingham City Council
project team recommend the following steps to be carried out as soon as possible:
1. Engage with, inform and provide the senior management team and politicians
with key messages to ensure that they are briefed on the potential WPL
scheme
2. Appoint an experienced WPL Project Manager to begin working through the
WPL Route Map and the recommendations in this report. Undertaking initial
work will ensure that momentum continues and that decision makers are kept
sufficiently informed
3. Liaise with relevant resources to begin the creation of a WPL Project Team,
advising them of what a WPL is, what they will be expected to contribute to the
delivery of a WPL scheme in Bristol, how much of their time is required for the
project and when their involvement will be needed based on the WPL Route
Map
4. Undertake a costing workshop with Nottingham City Council in order to begin
estimating the required budget for each stage and workstream within the WPL
Route Map
5. Track the progress of related schemes which are due to take significant steps
in the next six months (Bristol CAZ, Bus Back Better, Liveable Neighbourhoods)
and assess how any changes impact the proposed WPL Package and the
implementation of a WPL scheme in Bristol

Page 210
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 52
Further recommendations are set out in Appendix J and have been linked to the
relevant section of the Feasibility Study Report.

Bristol City Council is well positioned to progress with the development of a WPL
scheme and following the advice contained within this report will help to reduce the
time, cost and risk associated with WPL scheme development. Nottingham City
Council will continue to be available to provide its knowledge and experience
throughout Bristol’s WPL Route Map, offering a “critical friend” role and allowing Bristol
City Council to avoid and mitigate the challenges and potential pitfalls involved with
the creation of a WPL. Ongoing engagement with Nottingham City Council will ensure
that any future WPL in Bristol is fit for purpose and delivered as quickly and effectively
as possible, allowing the benefits of the WPL Package to be realised as soon as
practicable. The drive, vision and ambition of Bristol City Council is exciting and will
clearly lead to a high quality, sustainable transport system in Bristol.

Page 211
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 53
7.0 Appendices
7.1 Appendix A: Bristol Key Terms Glossary

Term Abbreviation Description
Atkins Bristol Workplace Atkins Study The Atkins Bristol Workplace Parking Levy Scoping Study 2011 was
Parking Levy Scoping commissioned by Bristol City Council to look into the potential number of
Study 2011 Workplace Parking Places (WPPs) there may be in Bristol for all three
potential WPL schemes (Central Core, Expanded Central Core and Citywide
scheme areas).The study outlines the methodology used by Atkins to
estimate the potential number of WPPs along with the costs to implement
and operate a WPL scheme in Bristol (2011 prices).
Bus Back Better In September 2019, the central government set out the Bus Back Better
strategy. The strategy sets out the vision and opportunity to deliver better
bus services for passengers across England through an ambitious and far-
reaching reform of how services are offered and delivered.
Bristol City Council will be publishing a Bus Service Improvement Plan which
will be developed with local operators, community transport bodies and local
businesses. The plan will set out the strategy and objectives along with a
detailed proposal as to how the objectives will be achieved and bus use will
increase. The Bus Service Improvement Plan will request funding from the
DfT’s COVID-19 Bus Services Support Grant and the Bus Service Operators
Grant in order to deliver the plan20.
Central Core The Central Core area is one of the three geographic options being
considered by Bristol City Council for a proposed WPL scheme. It covers the
major areas of employment within central Bristol and follows the boundary of
city centre activity. From discussions held with Bristol City Council officers,
the Central Core area is the preferred geographic option for a WPL scheme.
Citywide The Citywide area is one of the three geographic options being considered
by Bristol City Council for a proposed WPL scheme. It is the least preferred
option. The Citywide option would cover the entire Bristol City Council
administrative area and would therefore affect all businesses based in
Bristol.
Clean Air Zone CAZ A CAZ is a defined area where vehicles that have tailpipe emissions which
are not compliant with the pollution limits set by a local authority are charged
daily for entering. Bristol City Council are hoping to have a CAZ in place from
Summer 2022. The Bristol CAZ will be for Class D vehicles (cars, private hire
vehicles, taxis, LGVs, buses, coaches and HGVs) and will cover the Bristol
city centre region. The fee for Bristol’s CAZ is set at £9 per day for cars,
private hire vehicles, taxis and LGVs while buses, coaches and HGVs will be
charged £100 per day.
Draft West of England The West of England Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan is a
Local Cycling and significant and exciting first step towards transforming active travel in the
Walking Infrastructure region. The plan proposes capital investment of £411m by 2036 and is the
Plan result of a collaborative effort between the West of England councils, the
WECA and local stakeholder groups.
Expanded Central Core The Expanded Central Core area is one of the three geographic options
being considered by Bristol City Council for a proposed WPL scheme. The
Expanded Central Core corresponds with the area covered by the proposed
Residents Parking Zone “inner ring”, which would discourage parking
displacement on to residential streets by employees of organisations subject
to a WPL.
City Region Sustainable CRSTS The funding provides the necessary major investment for local transport
Transport Settlement priorities. The CRSTS is a follow up investment in local transport networks.
This new fund stems from the announcement made by the DfT that eight
eligible English city regions would receive £4.2 billion of additional funding
for local transport networks.
Joint Local Transport JLTP5 A Joint Local Transport Plan (JLTP) sets out the transport vision for all
Plan 5 authorities within a combined authority. The WECA currently have a JLTP4
that has set out the transport vision from 2020 until 2036. The JLTP4 will be
replaced in 2023 by the JLTP5.

20 Department for Transport – Bus Back Better - link

Page 212
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 54
A WPL scheme in Bristol will form part of the JLTP5; as well as tackling air
quality and congestion on its own, a WPL will also be used to fund some of
the other measures within the Plan
One City Plan The One City Plan outlines Bristol’s vision for the city in 2050 and confirms
the strategy to achieve the objectives. The plan contains six themes which
are responsible for achieving each objective. Each theme has a governing
board made up of experts and a cross-section of partners and citizens, who
refine the annual objectives as well as ensuring the delivery of the overall
objectives.21 All the initiatives within the One City Plan are underpinned by
the UN Sustainable Development Goals, which provide an internationally
recognised framework to benchmark the city’s aspirations and progress. The
One City Transport Board sits under the “Connectivity” theme and the WPL
scheme will feature prominently as a discussion topic at this forum once the
project begins.
Small Employer Discount Employers who provide below a certain number of LWPPs within the WPL
Threshold scheme area are exempt from paying the WPL charge. However, these
employers are still required to license each year. In Bristol, this threshold is
yet to be determined. In Nottingham, employers and any associated
employers who between them provide 10 or fewer LWPPs in total at all of
their premises within Nottingham City Council’s administrative boundary are
exempt from paying the WPL charge.
Transforming Cities Fund TCF2 The Transforming Cities Fund is a £2.45 billion capital grant transport fund
2 aimed at driving up productivity through investments in public and
sustainable transport infrastructure in some of England’s largest city regions.
The funding is for improvements into infrastructure such as new active travel
routes, smart ticketing and smart traffic controls. The last tranche of the fund
was known as Transforming Cities Fund 2. The WECA received £103 million
of funding as a mayoral combined authority.
West of England The WECA South Gloucestershire Council, Bath & North East Somerset Council and
Combined Authority Bristol City Council make up the West of England Combined Authority.
The WECA was formed in 2017 to champion the region and drive clean and
inclusive economic growth, with a central mayor collectively elected by South
Gloucestershire Council, Bath & North East Somerset Council and Bristol
City Council. The cabinet is made up of the Mayor of the West of England
along with the leaders of each member council.22 Although not included
within the WECA, North Somerset Council is considered a key partner and
for the purposes of the WPL project, their inclusion has been requested.

7.2 Appendix B: WPL Glossary
Term Abbreviation Definition
21 One City Plan - link
22 West of England - link

Page 213
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 55
Business Support A service currently offered by Nottingham City Council to businesses
within the Nottingham City Council administrative area. The support
includes running workshops and on-site events to provide sustainable
transport advice to staff. Nottingham City Council set up business
support under the Workplace Travel Service team. The team provide
advice and small grants (up to £10,000) to businesses. The grants are
provided to encourage local businesses to support the uptake of
sustainable transport. Examples of what companies use the grant
money for include, car park barriers, changing and shower areas,
bicycle shelters, etc.
Displaced Parking The displacement of commuters from on-site to on-street following the
implementation of a charge (e.g. WPL). In Nottingham, once the WPL
went live there was a displacement of commuter parking; this mainly
occurred at industrial estates where there is usually a lack of on-street
parking restrictions.
Liable Workplace Parking LWPPs A liable workplace parking place is a parking place provided by an
Places employer that is occupied by a vehicle which is used by an employee,
pupil, student or regular business visitor.
A regular business visitor is a consultant, contractor, supplier, agency
staff or other business visitor attending a regular place of work. A
regular place of work is a premises that a regular business visitor parks
at and attends on three or more days over a 14-day period.
LWPPs are parking places that are liable for the WPL charge.
Off-Street Parking Audit OSPA An Off-Street Parking Audit is an activity which the WPL Project Team
may choose to conduct in order to gather a thorough audit of the
potential number of LWPPs a local authority may have within their
designated WPL scheme area. The OSPA is usually conducted as a
survey with employers. The results from the OSPA inform the financial
modelling that is required as part of the FBC which must be submitted
to the Secretary of State for Transport.
Outline Business Case OBC The Outline Business Case sets out the preliminary thoughts regarding
a proposed WPL scheme. It contains the information needed to help
the local authority make decisions regarding the adoption of the project.
It states envisaged outcomes, benefits and potential risks associated
with the proposal. The OBC includes any studies conducted during
Stage One of the WPL Route Map.
Personal Journey Planning A service offered by the Workplace Travel Service team as part of the
business support they provide. Personal Journey Planning is the
assistance of planning journeys to and from work for employees of a
business who wish to use more sustainable methods of transport.
Red Tape Challenge Introduced in April 2011, the Red Tape Challenge was a government-
wide initiative aimed at reducing bureaucracy, giving businesses and
the general public an opportunity to comment on statutory rules and
regulations to decide which should be improved, kept or removed.
The Red Tape Challenge was applied to all areas of transport.
Traffic Management Programme A programme that identifies issues and solutions within the displaced
parking work stream such as junction protection, no waiting and
limited waiting.
WPL Licensing System The WPL Licensing System is an online IT system through which
employers register and update the number of LWPPs that they license
for at each premise.
WPL Route Map The WPL Route Map outlines the key workstreams that a local authority
must undertake and complete to successfully develop and implement
a WPL scheme. The WPL Route Map is based on Nottingham’s
experience as the first and only local authority to have successfully
implemented a WPL in the UK to date.
The WPL Route Map is split into three stages:
Stage One: Scheme Development and Outline Business Case
Stage Two: Public Consultation and Approval
Stage Three: Implementation and Operation.
Workplace Parking Charge WPC The Workplace Parking Charge is a car park management system
introduced by Nottingham City Council following the implementation of
its WPL scheme. The aim of the WPC is to offset Nottingham City
Council’s own car parking liability. The WPC places an annual charge
on Nottingham City Council employees who wish to drive to work and
the charge is taken from an employees’ salary each month. The parking

Page 214
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 56
charge is graded via salary therefore each individual relatively pays the
same amount in proportion to their salary.
Workplace Parking Levy WPL A Workplace Parking Levy is a charge on employers who provide
workplace parking. It is a type of congestion charging scheme that local
authorities are able to implement under the Transport Act 2000.
A local authority may introduce a WPL to tackle problems associated
with traffic congestion, by both providing funding for major transport
infrastructure initiatives and by acting as an incentive for employers to
manage their workplace parking provision.
WPL Package It is a legal requirement of the primary legislation (Transport Act 2000)
that WPL scheme revenue is ring-fenced for the delivery of Local
Transport Plan policies and objectives. It will be necessary for any local
authority that is considering a WPL to identify what the WPL scheme
will be expected to contribute towards and confirm how it is an essential
part of the delivery of their Local Transport Plan strategy.
Workplace Parking Places WPPs A parking place at a premises inside a local authority’s scheme area,
occupied by a vehicle used by an employee, pupil, student or regular
business visitor. Workplace parking places are not necessarily marked
or designated spaces. All employers may provide WPPs. For example,
a disabled parking place is still considered a WPP.
WPL Operational Team The WPL Operational Team is comprised of administrative and
operational staff. The administrative staff respond to emails and phone
calls, assisting employers with payment and licensing issues. The
operational staff visit premises within the administrative boundary to
ensure that employers are licensing correctly and assist with any
queries face-to-face. In Nottingham, the operational staff take a
compliance based approach and work with employers on an
educational basis to ensure that they licence correctly.
WPL Project Team The WPL Project Team are responsible for developing and
implementing a WPL scheme. The WPL Project team will usually
consist of a programme manager, project manager, project officers,
administrative staff and specialists. The WPL Project Team will work
with consultants and other service areas across the local authority to
successfully develop and implement the WPL scheme.
WPL Scheme Order A WPL Scheme Order is a required legal document that sets out the
details of the WPL scheme. It is the legal means by which WPL is
implemented. No WPL scheme can be applied without an approved
scheme order as it is the secondary legislation that permits a local
authority to run a WPL scheme.

Page 215
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 57
7.3 Appendix C: WPL Route Map

Page 216

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 58
7.4 Appendix D: Milestones and Dependencies Timeline

30/01/22
01/06/23 01/01/25
Bristol Liveable
Joint Local Transport Plan 5 02/05/24 Free public transport travel
Neighbourhoods
Approved UK General Election to be offered to U25s
policy sign off

01/01/24 - 03/06/24
City Centre
Redevelopments 31/05/25
06/05/21 30/07/22
- St Mary Le Port Target date for BCC
Local, Mayoral and Bristol Clean Air Zone (CAZ) 03/06/24 - 31/12/24
- Gallery’s to be Carbon Neutral
WECA elections is implemented Strategic Corridors

Page 217
01/01/2022 01/01/2023 01/01/2024 01/01/2025 01/01/2026 01/01/2027
05/04/2021 31/05/2027

01/01/23
29/10/21 09/05/24 01/10/24 09/05/25
Compliance year
WECA Bus Service Improvement Local and WPL charging WECA Elections
for clean air targets
Mayoral commences
Elections

30/06/22 - 31/03/27
City Region Sustainable Transport Settlements

Italics = dates that are not fixed.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 59
7.5 Appendix E: Timeline for a Bristol WPL Scheme

30/01/2023 - 21/04/2023
01/11/2023 - 29/03/2024 01/10/2024
05/04/2021 - 27/08/2021 6-12 week
WPL Implementation WPL 'Charging Commences'
WPL Feasibility Study Public Consultation

01/04/2024 - 27/09/2024
09/08/2022 - 29/10/2022 30/05/2023 - 29/10/2023
WPL 'Go Live'
Outline Business Secretary of State - No Charging
Case Production Approval for WPL

Page 218
05/04/2021 01/01/2022 01/01/2023 01/01/2024 31/10/2024

01/11/2022 - 30/10/2023 01/11/2023 - 31/10/2024
01/10/2021 - 29/10/2022
Stage Two - Stage Three -
Stage One -
Public Consultation and Approval Implementation and Operation
Scheme Development and
Outline Business Case

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 60
7.6 Appendix F: Governance and Project Team Structure
Recommended BCC WPL Project Structure for Stage One
One City Transport Board
Mayor/ The Economy & Skills Board
Deputy Mayor The Environment Board
Meet Quarterly WECA The Health & Wellbeing Board
Directors The Homes and Communities Board
Head of City Transport

WPL Steering Group
Inward Investment
Head of City Transport
Economic Development
Principal Transport Planner
Meet every 6 weeks Traffic Management Development
Comms Lead
Public Transport
NCC Advisors
Transport Strategy
WPL Project Manager

Lead Manager

Page 219
Meet weekly

Project Manager
Project Support

Internal External

Economic Commu nicatio ns Pro ject
Leg al Finance Par liamentary Transport
Development Offi cer Manag ement
Age nts Consultants
Consultants

Info rma tion , Busine ss
WPL Pack age NCC WPL Economic Imp roveme nt
JLTP L ead Pro cure me nt Govern ance &
Lead Officer Sup port Consultants District and
Risk
Busine ss Foru m

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 61
7.8 Appendix G: Stakeholder Radar

BCC Employees
(4.11)

Directors/Head of Services & Managers
(3.11)

Councillors
(3.12)
Executive Director –
Growth & Region
Green
(2.12) BCC External
Organisations
(3.41) Corporate Leadership Communications/Press The Federation
Board Office of Small Business
(2.11) (2.13) (3.21)
Local Lobbyist
Groups Chamber of
- For Commerce (2.41) Employers Employers
- Against L/M (3.25)
(3.42) Local Media 1Deputy Mayor x2 + Top 5/10
(2.42) (1.12) & (1.13) (2.21)
Residents Visitors/
One City Boards National Media
NHS (3.22) Conurbation
- Economy & Skills (2.43)
(2.22) (4.21)
- Environment Mayor
Public Health
- Health & WECA Mayor (1.11)
(2.44)

N
(1.42)
G C
BCC Wellbeing
V
DfT
Trade Unions (3.43) West of England (1.41)
Specialist High
(4.41) Combined Authority
E-Mobility End Businesses University of West
Operators (2.45) (2.23) of England
(3.44) Business West One City (3.23)
(2.48) Transport Board University of Bristol
Property
(1.31) (2.24)
Developers Destination Bristol
in Central Area (2.47)
Employees/ Trade
(3.45)
Unions
MPs (3.24)
Campaign Groups (2.46)
(3.46) Public Transport Operators (Bus Infrastructure (2.32) Business Improvement
companies) Districts
Equality Groups (3.25)
(2.31)
(3.47)

Joint Local
Transport Plan (JLTP) (3.31)

National
Transport Groups (3.32)

Level Meaning
V Vital to engage
N Necessary to engage
G Good to have
engaged
C Courtesy to inform

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page 220 P a g e | 62
7.9 Appendix H: 2X2 Power/Influence by Interest in WPL
Matrix

High 1.11
1.12
1.41 1.13
2.46 3.41
Influential Observers: Key Players:
Keep Satisfied 2.11 2.12 Engage Closely
2.42 2.44 1.31
1.42
2.43 3.12
3.42 2.31
Power/
3.46 3.22 3.24 2.48 2.13
Influence
2.45 2.41
3.24
3.11 3.23 2.24
2.23 2.21
3.21 3.25
3.45 2.32 2.22 3.31
2.47
Spectators: Active Players:
3.32
Monitor 3.44 Keep Informed
4.21 3.47 3.43
4.41
4.11
Low

Low Interest in High
WPL

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page 221 P a g e | 63
7.10 Appendix I: Risk Register

CONSTITUENT RISKS TO BE MANAGED
Latest
Opening
Threat
Threat
Constituent Risk Description Risk Management Counter Measures & Actions Status Owner Level
Level e.g.
e.g.
2x4=8
2x4=8

Political Climate

As the UK moves out of the transitional period and into a post- The impacts of Brexit are still emerging and there is the
Brexit economy, there could be negative impacts on employers in possibility that the COVID-19 pandemic is also masking the
the short to medium term. Any negative impacts on employers impacts. Engagement held with Bristol City Council officers
may reduce the political will for a WPL scheme in Bristol, which in indicated that they accept that businesses may seek to use
turn could see the development of a scheme being delayed or Brexit/COVID-19 as a reason to avoid/delay the need to

Page 222
even postponed. deal with poor air quality and the issue of congestion. A
1 3 4 12 Open AC 3 4 12
strong Stakeholder Management Strategy and
Communications Plan with key messages that are
supported by facts will help Bristol City Council to put
forward the need to tackle poor air quality and congestion
now more than ever.

The unknown impact of Brexit on the government and local The impacts of Brexit are still emerging and there is the
authorities could cause delays in the short to medium term plans possibility that the COVID-19 pandemic is also masking the
to implement a WPL scheme in Bristol, which impacts the target impacts. A post-Brexit and post-COVID-19 economy could
2 3 5 15 Open AC 3 5 15
October 2024 “go live” date. mean that there are grants and funding available from the
government, which strengthens the case for a WPL.

The awarding of grants from the government to local authorities The government has promised local authorities additional
for sustainable transport projects/transport infrastructure plans money for public transport infrastructure (buses) and active
could pose a threat to the likelihood of approvals for future WPL travel. However, the grants will not be enough to fund the
3 schemes. 3 4 12 future sustainable transport projects for local authorities. Open AC 2 3 6
As a result, schemes such as a WPL will be viewed as a
positive as it will show the government evidence of match
funding.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 64
The JLTP5 is not yet drafted or approved, therefore any delays in The current JLTP4 was seen to not go far enough
the approval of the plan could undermine the DfT sign-off of a regarding tackling climate change. It is envisaged that the
future WPL scheme. JLTP5, which is expected to be signed off by mid-2023, will
4 3 4 12 look to showcase Bristol's vision to be a carbon neutral city Open AC 2 3 6
by 2030. It is felt by Bristol City Council officers that the
JLTP5 will not be a threat to the sign-off of a WPL scheme.

There is a risk that the WPL scheme or WPL Package for Bristol Bristol City Council officers will contribute towards the
are not included in the JLTP5; this would undermine or reduce the development of the JLTP5 to ensure that the WPL scheme
5 scope of the WPL scheme as the ring-fenced funding is a legal 3 4 12 and supporting WPL Package for Bristol are included. Open AC 2 3 6
requirement under the Transport Act 2000.

Page 223
The 2021 elections saw a new Labour Mayor elected for the West Bristol City Council officers will ensure a close working
of England. While it is early days, there is a risk that differing relationship between the policital leaders and seek an
priorities between the West of England Mayor and Mayor of Bristol agreement in advance of the work packages that are to be
could see a delay to a potential WPL scheme, due to differences funded. The WPL will remain a Bristol City Council function
over the WPL package and operation of infrastructure funded by and not a WECA function. However, it will be key to get an
6 a Bristol WPL. The new WECA Mayor will have a higher profile 3 3 9 agreement on the work packages that are to be funded in Open AC 2 3 6
than his predecessor, therefore will want to be seen as being order to tackle congestion, improve air quality and help
involved in delivering sustainable transport improvements across solve the WECA aims of regeneration.
the WECA.

The national consensus is that Bristol is a “well-off” region, While the region is externally seen as less in need of
therefore there is uncertainty regarding the level of support from levelling up than other areas, it is evident that Bristol has
7 central government which Bristol City Council will receive for the 4 4 16 significant areas of deprivation that require investment in Open AC 4 4 16
WPL project and transport projects in general. transport infrastructure to level up across the region.

Project Resources

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 65
If Bristol City Council does not recruit or faces delays in procuring There is a common activity (restructure) taking place at
the resources recommended in the project structure, then there Bristol City Council. This process will review project
could be significant delays to the project which would put the management resourcing and seek to ensure appropriate
8 provisional target October 2024 “go live” date at a high risk of 3 5 15 provision is made for all projects. Bristol City Council Open AC 3 5 15
failure. recently went into contract with a strategic partner, Arcadis.
This will also enable use of additional resources as
required.
There is insufficient understanding and appreciation of the amount Consider using VOA/business rates databases to gather
of work and resources required for Stage One of the WPL Route detailed data on employment “make-up” within Bristol.
9 Map e.g. for studies/data etc. and the necessity for this 3 5 15 Open AC 3 5 15
information to inform the OBC, communications activity etc.

If key Bristol City Council officers move on, the WPL project could Bristol City Council acknowledges this is always going to
be delayed due to loss of knowledge transfer, expertise and be a risk but is not deemed as a high risk.
10 4 4 16 Open AC 2 4 8
continuity.

If Bristol City Council do not engage expert WPL advisors in some Bristol City Council will be engaging with consultants who
capacity during Stage One, then they could face increased costs have proven experience of delivering and operating WPL

Page 224
11 and timeframes during the scheme development phase. The 3 5 15 schemes. Open AC 1 4 4
quality of the scheme offer could also be reduced.

Bristol City Council not acquiring or being delayed in engaging Bristol City Council will be engaging with the relevant
12 with the appropriate external specialist consultancy support that 3 4 12 specialists to ensure that there are no delays to the Open AC 2 4 8
will be necessary for the successful delivery of Stage One. successful delivery of Stage One.
The time taken to procure and secure the appropriate resources Bristol City Council officers will be holding early
for the WPL Project Team means that there may be a delay in the engagement with the Bristol City Council procurement
13 transfer of knowledge, understanding, scope and details of 3 4 12 team to identify issues and resolve any potential problems Open AC 2 4 8
delivering a WPL scheme; leading to progress in delivering Stage and delays.
One workstreams being delayed.
If Bristol City Council does not ensure that an updated parking Bristol City Council officers agree that urgent parking data
survey is commissioned prior to or early on in Stage One, then the must be prioritised on the Central Core and some on the
financial modelling and ultimately the OBC will not be robust and Expanded Central Core.
14 3 4 12 Open AC 2 4 8
will be liable to challenge.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 66
Communications

If key internal stakeholders are not adequately briefed and "on Bristol City Council officers will prepare briefing documents
message" and inaccurate information is put into the public for key internal stakeholders to ensure that they are
15 domain, then the development of the WPL scheme could be 3 4 12 adequately briefed and "on message" at all times. Open AC 2 2 4
inhibited in certain areas and there could be revenue implications.

A lack of communications activity with the appropriate Bristol City Council has internal communications
stakeholders will result in delays to the workstreams and project, specialists in mind for a WPL project.
16 as well as misinformation regarding the project. There is a need 3 4 12 Open AC 2 3 6
for an experienced Communications Officer.

There is a risk that if a communications strategy is not in place Bristol City Council will be using the Feasibility Study
with consistent and detailed proactive and reactive key messages, Report and appendices produced by Nottingham City
then inconsistencies with information released by Bristol City Council to develop their communications strategy.
17 3 4 12 Open AC 2 3 6
Council into the public domain could result in misinformation,
undermining the integrity of the scheme.

Page 225
It is essential to have a key figure(s) to front and represent the Adam Crowther will be providing an update on the WPL to
WPL scheme proposal. Any changes in this key figure(s) will have Councillor Don Alexander, Cabinet member for Transport.
18 a detrimental impact on the promotion and reputation of the 3 5 15 Open AC 3 3 9
scheme, especially in Stages One and Two.

Any delays to an approved vision outlining the benefits of the WPL The Bristol City Council WPL Project Team will link the
scheme could see increased objections from employers, resulting WPL deliverables to the One City Plan and communicate
19 in negative media coverage and making it more difficult to gain 3 4 12 into the public domain. Open AC 2 3 6
scheme approval, particularly in the context of the Red Tape
Challenge review to address key business concerns.
Any delays to an approved vision outlining the benefits of the WPL The Stakeholder Management Strategy and
scheme could see delayed support and less vocal backing from Communications Plan workstream identifies a suite of
environmental groups during the informal engagement/public products to be developed for target groups. Engagement
consultation process, making it harder for Bristol City Council to with the environmental lobby as early as practicable is
20 3 3 9 Open AC 2 2 4
gather wider support. recommended. Bristol City Council officers will be
engaging with the environmental lobby as a priority once
all the necessary requirements required for the OBC have
been fulfilled.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 67
Adherence to the Nottingham Model

Nottingham City Council are in a unique position as the only local Bristol City Council recognise the need to follow the
authority to have developed, delivered and operated a WPL fundamental building blocks of Nottingham City Council's
scheme. If Bristol City Council choose not to follow the WPL scheme and are cognisant of the availability of advice
fundamental building blocks of Nottingham’s WPL scheme, then and experience from Nottingham City Council’s
21 any Bristol WPL scheme is at higher risk of legal challenge, 3 5 15 practitioners as to how Bristol’s scheme would benefit from Open AC 2 2 4
leading to increased costs for further scheme design and potential Nottingham's learning to reduce risk, optimise expenditure
delays to the delivery timescales and the target October 2024 “go and achieve the target delivery date.
live” date.
Bristol City Council does not identify and allocate the necessary Bristol City Council officers will communicate the Feasibility
funding for the internal/external resources that are required to Study Report via briefings to key officers/politicians. The
commence the delivery of Stage One and associated engagement with key officers and politicians will allow the
workstreams. Bristol City Council officers to identify potential costs,
timescales and risks

Page 226

22 3 5 15 Open AC 3 4 12

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 68
COVID-19

The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has had an effect on the The effect of COVID-19 on businesses and their ability to
ability for local businesses to operate and their performance. The operate is still unknown. Nottingham City Council can
end of the extended furlough scheme could see some businesses provide data based on the licensing behaviour of its
reduce operations leading to a smaller number of liable employers employers that are licenced for the WPL scheme. It is felt
within a future Bristol City Council WPL scheme area. There is a that in the short-medium term, there will not be the same
possibility that this could reduce the total number of LWPPs. levels of provision as pre-COVID levels. The post-COVID
working arrangements will need to be reflected in the
financial model. The furlough scheme now requires a
23 3 4 12 contribution from employers, however the whole scheme Open AC 3 4 12
has been extended until 30/09/21 and therefore the impact
will not be known for some time. Bristol City Council is
considering a target October 2024 “go live” date - it is
expected a clearer picture will be visible by then. Bristol is
seeing an increase in traffic volumes. The availability of

Page 227
other modes of transport delivered as a result of a WPL
scheme is a positive.

The outbreak of COVID-19 has seen an increase in the number The situation is dynamic and the medium-long term
of employees working from home. The ability and practicality of implications of COVID-19 on the provision of LWPPs is as
some employees being able to work from home could see yet unknown. It is felt likely that there will not be the same
businesses downsize their office space and in turn reduce the levels of provision as pre-COVID and this will need to be
number of LWPPs they provide. reflected in the financial model. Nottingham City Council
can provide data based on the licensing behaviour of its
employers as a result of COVID-19.
24 3 4 12 It is yet to be seen what the impact of COVID-19 is on some Open AC 3 4 12
businesses. The new post-Covid working models are
unknown, therefore Bristol City Council will be monitoring
to gain a clearer picture. Bristol City Council officers agree
that the best reference point is the Nottingham WPL
Licensing System and how this is being impacted.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 69
Further clarity is required on the vision of a WPL in the context of The situation is dynamic and the medium-long term
enhanced public transport plans (S-M-L). Additionally, the implications of COVID-19 on the use of public transport is
prevalence of social distancing measures until the “new normal” as yet unknown. Whilst there will be a short-medium term
could lead to concerns about increased investment in public reduction in the patronage of public transport, it is felt likely
transport infrastructure. that pre-COVID levels will be seen at some future stage
and public confidence will return. The government
published a Roadmap to Recovery with an end to social
25 2 4 8 distancing on 19th July 2021 and return of remaining Open AC 2 4 8
industries. Public transport patronage is to be monitored by
Bristol City Council. The government’s extensive vaccine
programme rollout is ongoing. The ongoing risk posed by
COVID-19 variants, e.g. at present the Indian/Delta variant
appears to be prevalent and the impact on further lockdown
restrictions in Bristol should be monitored.

The long-term impacts of social distancing on public transport The vaccination program is underway and will be ongoing.
usage/capacity is as yet unknown and should be kept under As the restrictions begin to ease, it is expected that more
review during scheme development. There is a risk that there people will return to the workplace and public transport

Page 228
could be reduced patronage on public transport, which could usage will increase too.
26 3 4 12 Open AC 3 4 12
impact upon the proposed WPL package. The WPL vision may
therefore need to be reviewed.

The economic impact felt by S-M-L businesses from the effects of Bristol City Council will be monitoring the recovery of
COVID-19 could lead to increased non-cooperation as part of the businesses and a sensitive approach will be adopted.
data collection during the OSPA, which undermines the financial Bristol City Council will be undertaking proactive
27 model and the OBC. 3 3 9 stakeholder engagement when engaging with businesses, Open AC 3 3 9
to ease fears.

The long-term effects on physical and mental health as a result of Bristol City Council officers will monitor the situation.
the COVID-19 pandemic could lead to commuters being more
28 reliant on cars as opposed to using public transport. 4 4 16 Open AC 4 3 12

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 70
Other

Bus Back Better strategy – if Bristol City Council receives Bristol City Council officers feel that receiving a significant
significant funding then the scope of the WPL Package could be amount of funding from the Bus Back Better strategy could
reduced. If less funding is required for the WPL scheme then it make it easier to implement a WPL scheme. There will
29 could put the project and scheme in doubt. 3 4 12 never be enough money for the city's transport needs. WPL AC 2 3 6
revenue would still be required for a mass transit system,
as outlined in the One City Plan.

The implementation and direct impact of a CAZ could see air The CAZ is not expected to significantly reduce traffic
quality levels reduce significantly. As a result, there may be no volumes and is not expected to have a significant impact
need for a WPL scheme. on the requirement for a WPL scheme. The potential issue
30 3 5 15 Open AC 2 2 4
of "double charging" of vehicle users i.e. pay the CAZ and
a WPL charge by their employer, will offset the WPL

Page 229
liability.
If Bristol City Council do not have an effective procurement Bristol City Council opts for a middle ground for projects
strategy in place to commission studies and bring in expert such a WPL. They will use a mix of internal resources and
consultants, they could face delays in initiating and completing the consultants, as appropriate. Bristol City Council has a
31 4 4 16 Open AC 2 3 6
WPL Route Map to develop and implement a WPL scheme. strategic partner which could see a greater use of
consultants. Bristol City Council also has a strategic
partner for procurement.
The Bristol City Council desire and justification to develop a WPL Bristol City Council officers are confident that initially a
scheme may be reduced if the potential number of places is less Central Core scheme can be delivered, with a view to
32 than the estimates of the Atkins Study. 4 4 16 expanding in the future. Open AC 3 3 9

If the Secretary of State for Transport rejects Leicester City Bristol City Council officers will monitor the situation.
Council’s WPL FBC then this could have a bearing and impact on
33 the Bristol WPL scheme development. 4 4 16 Open AC 4 4 16

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 71
7.11 Appendix J: Recommendations

Reference Page(s) Recommendation
Review relevant economic, transport, congestion, air quality, deprivation and social
R1 11
inclusion/exclusion studies and ensure that they are up to date
Assess the need to commission new studies where information in current studies is out
R2 11
of date
Carry out an OSPA to understand the “make-up” of employers and form a baseline
R3 11
dataset for scheme development
Commission Nottingham City Council to conduct a desktop parking exercise using
R4 12 multiple regression analysis and based on Nottingham’s live WPL Licensing System, to
estimate how many LWPPs Bristol may have
Model the transport, financial and economic elements of the WPL scheme to illustrate
R5 12
how it would operate and fund future transport projects
R6 13 Introduce a risk management strategy and regularly update the Risk Register
R7 13 Draft a WPL Scheme Order
Introduce and progress the displaced parking workstream to tackle the potential
R8 13
displacement of commuter parking
Consider the introduction of a car park management scheme at Bristol City Council
R9 13
premises, where commuter parking occurs
Outline the transport package that will be funded by the revenue generated from a WPL
R10 14
scheme
Develop a detailed public consultation programme including specified timeframes,
R11 16
activities and methodology
Carry out a robust public consultation programme to engage and consult with all key
R12 17
stakeholders
Monitor the new working arrangements and commuter travel behaviour as a return to a
R13 22-23 “new normal” begins, following the lifting of lockdown restrictions as a result of the
COVID-19 pandemic
R14 24 Regularly review and update the Milestones and Dependencies Timeline
Conduct a “feet on the ground” OSPA that factors in any questions from the previous
R15 26
Atkins Study
Identify and include any existing displaced commuter parking counts in the WPP
R16 26
estimations (for example, on-street parking around industrial estates)
Review the list of sites visited by Atkins and cross-reference with VOA data, in order to
R17 27
begin categorising employers by size and industry
R18 28 Conduct further research into the cost of parking provided by private companies
Conduct a survey in Stage One to further understand commuter behaviour across the
R29 29
Bristol region
Follow the Governance and Project Team Structure outlined in Appendix F and Section
R20 31-36
5.4
Create a Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan to identify
R21 37-44
stakeholders and ensure that their interest levels are maintained or increased
Monitor and regularly update the dynamic Risk Register document, with risks that are
R22 45-49 dealt with being closed, new risks being identified as the scheme develops and adequate
mitigation implemented

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page 230 P a g e | 72
Key Contacts:
Jason Gooding
Head of Parking, Fleet and Transport Operations
Email: jason.gooding@nottinghamcity.gov.uk
Nigel Hallam
WPL Service Manager
Email: nigel.hallam@nottinghamcity.gov.uk

Copyright © 2021 by Nottingham City Council

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, transmitted in any form or
by any means, including photography, recording or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the
prior written permission of Nottingham City Council, or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms
agreed with the appropriate reprographics rights organisations.

Permission requests should be sent to Jason Gooding, Head of Parking, Fleet and Transport Operations,
Nottingham City Council, Loxley House, Station Street, Nottingham, NG2 3NG.

Full acknowledgement of the author and source must be given.

Page 231
Equality Impact Assessment [version 2.12]

Title: Workplace Parking Levy – Outline Business Case Development
☒ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☒ New
☐ Other [please state] ☐ Already exists / review ☐ Changing
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Jacob Pryor
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Transport Policy, Bidding
and Data Group Manager

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of an Equality Impact Assessment is to assist decision makers in understanding the impact of proposals
as part of their duties under the Equality Act 2010. Detailed guidance to support completion can be found here
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com).
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the process by someone with a good knowledge of the
proposal and service area, and sufficient influence over the proposal. It is good practice to take a team approach to
completing the equality impact assessment. Please contact the Equality and Inclusion Team early for advice and
feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Describe who it is aimed at and the intended aims /
outcomes. Where known also summarise the key actions you plan to undertake. Please use plain English, avoiding
jargon and acronyms. Equality Impact Assessments are viewed by a wide range of people including decision-makers
and the wider public.
The Committee report set out the current thinking around how a Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) would work and
the practical steps required to deliver one. The report also seeks approval to allocate funding for the development
of a business case for the scheme:

The aim of a WPL scheme is to tackle congestion by placing a charge upon the use of commuter workplace
parking places (WPPs). The parking places may have been free of charge to the employees for some time
previously. The aim is also to encourage employers to manage the number of free workplace parking
places that they provide, whilst promoting the use of sustainable transport. The introduction of a WPL has
other benefits associated with the reduction in the use of the car and increase in the use of alternative
modes such as walking, cycling and public transport e.g., improvements to health and the environment.

• The details of the potential WPL scheme requires further work but essentially workplaces with parking
places would face an annual charge per parking place and the employer would decide whether to pass
that compulsory charge onto the employee or not. The parking charges earned from the scheme provide
local authorities with a ring-fenced source of revenue to fund Local Transport Plan policies and objectives
(and the associated transport schemes such as improved bus services). Specifically, the Transport Act 2000
Road User Charging and Workplace Parking Levy Explanatory Note, states: “The Act enables local traffic
authorities outside London to introduce road user charging and workplace parking levies to help tackle
congestion and use the revenue to directly or indirectly facilitate local transport policy goals of the
licensing authority.”

1.2 Who will the proposal have the potential to affect?
☒ Bristol City Council workforce ☒ Service users 232 ☒ The wider community
Page
☐ Commissioned services ☒ City partners / Stakeholder organisations
Additional comments:

1.3 Will the proposal have an equality impact?
Could the proposal affect access levels of representation or participation in a service, or does it have the potential to
change e.g. quality of life: health, education, or standard of living etc.?
If ‘No’ explain why you are sure there will be no equality impact, then skip steps 2-4 and request review by Equality
and Inclusion Team.
If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment, or if you plan to complete the assessment at a later stage please state
this clearly here and request review by the Equality and Inclusion Team.

☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

The introduction of a WPL will have a range of impacts for different protected characteristic groups but the full
details of these impacts will not be clear until the necessary development work has been undertaken to
understand the size, scope and pricing strategy of the scheme. Therefore, this EQIA will need to be continuously
reviewed and updated as the project progresses. A final decision on any WPL scheme will need to be taken by
Committee at which point an updated EQIA will be provided.

Step 2: What information do we have?

2.1 What data or evidence is there which tells us who is, or could be affected?
Please use this section to demonstrate an understanding of who could be affected by the proposal. Include general
population data where appropriate, and information about people who will be affected with particular reference to
protected and other relevant characteristics: How we measure equality and diversity (bristol.gov.uk)
Use one row for each evidence source and say which characteristic(s) it relates to. You can include a mix of
qualitative and quantitative data e.g. from national or local research, available data or previous consultations and
engagement activities.
Outline whether there is any over or under representation of equality groups within relevant services - don't forget
to benchmark to the local population where appropriate. Links to available data and reports are here Data, statistics
and intelligence (sharepoint.com). See also: Bristol Open Data (Quality of Life, Census etc.); Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA); Ward Statistical Profiles.

For workforce / management of change proposals you will need to look at the diversity of the affected teams using
available evidence such as HR Analytics: Power BI Reports (sharepoint.com) which shows the diversity profile of
council teams and service areas. Identify any over or under-representation compared with Bristol economically
active citizens for different characteristics. Additional sources of useful workforce evidence include the Employee
Staff Survey Report and Stress Risk Assessment

Data / Evidence Source Summary of what this tells us
[Include a reference where known]

Bristol City Council WPL Feasibility Previous studies (Atkins 2011) have provided high level estimates of
Report (2011) the number of parking spaces that could be encompassed in a WPL
scheme based on different geographies. These range from a lower
estimate of 8,600 parking spaces for a smaller central zone to an
upper estimate of 57,000 for a scheme covering the entire city.

Page 233
The WPL Feasibility Study (2021) notes that without undertaking a
more detailed audit of spaces the error bars on these estimates
remain high.

Bristol Quality of Life Survey 2023/24 67% of respondents think that air quality and traffic pollution is a
problem locally which suggests that there is majority support for
initiatives that seek to reduce the impacts of car use in the city.

74% of people think that traffic congestion is a problem locally which
suggests broad support for measures that reduce levels of traffic in
the city

36% of respondents state that they drive to work (2% car share)
which suggests – depending on the coverage of the WPL scheme –
that a significant number of people would be impacted by the
proposal.

A slightly higher percentage of people in the most deprived areas
(41.7%) and people between 50-65 drive to work (40.6%) than the
average. Disabled people (25.8%) and younger people between 16-24
(26.8%) are much less likely to drive to work.

% for whom lack of transport options
Quality of Life 2023-24 prevents them from leaving their home
Indicator: when they want to

Group Percentage
Bristol Average 22.4
10% most deprived 26.2
16 to 24 years 35.5
50 years and older 19.3
Disabled 33.1
Asian/Asian British 35.1
Black/Black British 19.8
Mixed/Multiple ethnic groups 30.7
Black, Asian and Minority
Ethnic 31.1
White Minority Ethnic 24.8
White British 20.6
Female 24.0
Male 20.5
LGB+ 34.3
Trans 36.4
Christian 20.9
Other religion 25.8
No religion or faith 22.4
Rented from housing
association 23.5
Rented from private landlord 27.3
Rented from the council 24.4
All carers 28.1
Page 234
Single parents 22.7
No qualifications 23.5

Quality of Life 2023-24
Indicator: % who drive to work

Group Percentage
Bristol Average 36.7
10% most deprived 41.7
16 to 24 years 26.8
50 years and older 40.6
Disabled 25.8
Asian/Asian British 36.1
Black/Black British 32.8
Mixed/Multiple ethnic groups 29.0
Black, Asian and Minority
Ethnic 34.5
White Minority Ethnic 30.4
White British 38.3
Female 35.7
Male 38.0
LGB+ 28.2
Trans 11.9
Christian 44.4
Other religion 36.5
No religion or faith 32.6
Rented from housing
association 30.7
Rented from private landlord 26.8
Rented from the council 30.0
All carers 43.5
Single parents 50.5
No qualifications 30.8

NOMIS Bristol has approximately 18,395 businesses with a higher proportion
Nomis - Official Census and Labour of small (10 to 49 employees) and large (250+ employees) employers
Market Statistics (nomisweb.co.uk) than the regional average. More work is required to understand the
allocation of parking spaces across these businesses as it is likely that
many (particularly among micro and small businesses) will have no
allocated parking and therefore will not be impacted by the scheme.

Travel to Work Survey Bristol, March Bristol’s Travel to Work Survey results reveal that 31% of employees
2024 travel to work by car (with an additional 6% car sharing). On average
people driving to work travel in 3.2 days per week and travel an
average distance of 35 miles a day. The latter statistic demonstrates
that many commuters are travelling into Bristol from outside of the
local authority boundary and that the WPL will have impacts beyond
Bristol.
Page 235
Note the following % splits don’t add up to 100% because of the
option ‘Prefer not to say’

The survey notes that there is a relatively equal split between men
(30%) and women (32%) who drive to work.

In line with the Quality of Life Survey the Travel to Work Survey
highlights that people 50+ (39%) are more likely to drive to work than
younger people under 30 (21%).

The survey identifies that people driving to work are more likely to be
from a white ethnic background (33%) than an ethnic minority group
(24%)

Unlike the Quality of Life Survey the Travel to Work Survey suggests
that an almost equal proportion of disabled (32%) and non-disabled
(31%) travel to work by car.

Bristol Walking and Cycling Index (2023) The Bristol Walking and Cycling Index polls a representative example
of Bristol’s population (circa 1,000 respondents). The survey reveals
data that would support the aims and objectives of a WPL scheme:

- 49% of people want to walk, wheel or cycle more
- 35% of people want to take public transport more
- 29% of people want to drive less

In addition to the report notes that 64% of people want more
investment in walking and wheeling, 58% more investment in cycling,
83% more investment in public transport and only 23% more
investment in driving.

Additional comments:

2.2 Do you currently monitor relevant activity by the following protected characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☐ Gender Reassignment
☐ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☐ Pregnancy/Maternity ☒ Race
☐ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☐ Sexual Orientation

2.3 Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
Where there are gaps in the evidence, or you don’t have enough information about some equality groups, include an
equality action to find out in section 4.2 below. This doesn’t mean that you can’t complete the assessment without
the information, but you need to follow up the action and if necessary, review the assessment later. If you are
unable to fill in the gaps, then state this clearly with a justification.
For workforce related proposals all relevant characteristics may not be included in HR diversity reporting (e.g.
pregnancy/maternity). For smaller teams diversity data may be redacted. A high proportion of not known/not
disclosed may require an action to address under-reporting.

While there a lot of relevant data exists on the commuting habits of Bristol’s residents the following gaps remain:

- Whether different groups currently pay for parking or are offered free parking at their workplace.
- An accurate picture of the number of employee parking bays that may form part of the scheme.
- The ability of employers and employees to meet additional costs.
Page 236
2.4 How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
You will nearly always need to involve and consult with internal and external stakeholders during your assessment.
The extent of the engagement will depend on the nature of the proposal or change. This should usually include
individuals and groups representing different relevant protected characteristics. Please include details of any
completed engagement and consultation and how representative this had been of Bristol’s diverse communities.
Include the main findings of any engagement and consultation in Section 2.1 above.

If you are managing a workforce change process or restructure please refer to Managing a change process or
restructure (sharepoint.com) for advice on consulting with employees etc. Relevant stakeholders for engagement
about workforce changes may include e.g. staff-led groups and trades unions as well as affected staff.

Presently only a feasibility study has been undertaken in relation to the WPL scheme. Further engagement is
planned should committee approve the proposal to develop the business case further.

2.5 How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
Explain how you will continue to engage with stakeholders throughout the course of planning and delivery. Please
describe where more engagement and consultation is required and set out how you intend to undertake it. Include
any targeted work to seek the views of under-represented groups. If you do not intend to undertake it, please set
out your justification. You can ask the Equality and Inclusion Team for help in targeting particular groups.

The scheme has been subject to an initial feasibility study which outlines a stakeholder management strategy for
future stages of project development. This highlights the need for extensive public consultation as well as
delivering a communications plan which sets out how key stakeholders (e.g. employers) will be kept updated and
informed at key stages of the project. The next stage of development will advance the stakeholder strategy and
communication plan and any scheme will be subject to public consultation and committee sign off before delivery.

Step 3: Who might the proposal impact?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered above and the characteristics protected by the Equality Act 2010.
Also include details of existing issues for particular groups that you are aware of and are seeking to address or
mitigate through this proposal. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying potential impacts etc.
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com)

3.1 Does the proposal have any potentially adverse impacts on people based on their
protected or other relevant characteristics?
Consider sub-categories and how people with combined characteristics (e.g. young women) might have particular
needs or experience particular kinds of disadvantage.
Where mitigations indicate a follow-on action, include this in the ‘Action Plan’ Section 4.2 below.
GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many groups)

The WPL scheme is still at an early stage of development with key details such as pricing, scope and potential
exemptions not yet determined. As such this EQIA is proportional to the level of detail currently available.

Page 237
The analysis of the data suggests there is high levels of support for measures that improve conditions for walking,
cycling and public transport and for securing more investment for these modes. Residents want to drive less and
walk, cycle, and use public transport more.

The scheme is likely to have an impact on a significant number of commuters who drive to work and of that group
it is not unreasonable to suggest that people on lower incomes will likely find it harder to meet additional costs if
their employer passes the cost of the WPL scheme on to them.

The analysis finds that older people make up a greater proportion of people who travel to work by car and
therefore they are more likely to be impacted by the scheme than other groups.

Whilst a levy would be for the employer not the employee there is a strong possibility that charges would be
passed on directly to employees or the overall number of car parking spaces reduced - so impacts below have
been assessed on that basis.

A previous scoping study identified that concessions could be made for specific groups, such as blue badge
holders, small businesses, and NHS facilities etc.

Analysis at this stage is limited to consideration of the direct impact of a levy on employees and has not
considered any potential additional pressure on on-street parking, as the levy would apply to the parking space
itself rather than the vehicle.

PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Younger people are less likely to be reliant on a car to get to work. The reduction in
congestion and re-investment of fees into improved public transport options will
provide a disproportionate benefit this group
Mitigations: None
Age: Older People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: This group is more likely to be drive to work and as such is likely to be
disproportionately impacted by the proposal if employers decide to pass on costs to
them. That said, the Quality-of-Life survey 2023/24 shows that the number of people
from the 50+ age group that state that they ‘find it difficult to manage financially’ is
much lower than the average.
Mitigations: None
Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: A WPL scheme could potentially have an adverse impact on Disabled employees who
need a car in order to maintain a quality of life and access to employment. A WPL could
also adversely impact a Disabled person who may need to incorporate other tasks into
their commute to work (trip chaining) such as attending necessary appointments in
order to maintain their health.

Mitigations: Consider exception for all Disabled Employees. Blue Badge scheme may offer partial
mitigations for those Disabled employees who have them, and some employers may
already have designated spaces for Disabled People.
Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Women are statistically more likely to hold caring responsibilities for children and older
adults and would therefore be disproportionately affected if they need to incorporate
other tasks into their commute to work (trip chaining) such as school run, caring for or
helping with tasks for older adults.

Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
employees with caring responsibilities.
Sexual orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Pregnancy / Maternity Page
Does your analysis indicate a 238
disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: As above re. caring responsibilities and trip chaining. Pregnant employees may be more
dependent on having their own transport for pre-natal appointments or if they find
public transport inaccessible.
Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
pregnant employees.
Gender reassignment Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic households in the UK are more likely to be in deep
poverty and experience higher levels of material deprivation. As such if employers pass
on WPL scheme costs to these groups they may find it harder to meet these additional
costs
Mitigations: No mitigation identified at this stage.
Religion or Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Belief
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☒
civil partnership
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS
Socio-Economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: The Quality-of-Life Survey suggests that people living in areas of deprivation are slightly
more likely to drive to work than the city average. If employers pass on WPL scheme
costs to these groups they may find it harder to meet these additional costs
Mitigations: See general comments above
Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: As above – those who hold caring responsibilities for children and older adults and
would therefore be disproportionately affected if they need to incorporate other tasks
into their commute to work (trip chaining)
Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
employees with caring responsibilities.
Other groups [Please add additional rows below to detail the impact for any other relevant groups as appropriate e.g.
asylum seekers and refugees; care experienced; homelessness; armed forces personnel and veterans]
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:

3.2 Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their protected or other
relevant characteristics?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our Public Sector Equality Duty to:
✓ Eliminate unlawful discrimination for a protected group
✓ Advance equality of opportunity between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t
✓ Foster good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t

How people move around the city is intrinsically linked to equality and inclusion. We know that many groups with
protected characteristics are more likely to suffer the negative impacts of car use – such as congestion, poor air
quality, traffic accidents and unhealthy physical environments, whilst at the same time having more limited access
and use of vehicles. In addition, we know that these groups are much more reliant on walking and public transport
Page 239
as a means of accessing work, education, training, and services. (Transport and inequality: An evidence review for
the Department for Transport, NatCen, 2019).

This proposal is in line with the Bristol Transport Strategy that seeks to rebalance the transport system to ensure
that car use is priced fairly compared with walking, cycling and public transport. Cars take up a disproportionate
amount of space on public highway which limits the use of that space for more investment in sustainable modes
of transport (e.g. bike and bus lanes and wider pavements). By increasing the tariffs associated car ownership we
may be able to encourage people to re-evaluate the need to own a vehicle.

Step 4: Impact

4.1 How has the equality impact assessment informed or changed the proposal?
What are the main conclusions of this assessment? Use this section to provide an overview of your findings. This
summary can be included in decision pathway reports etc.
If you have identified any significant negative impacts which cannot be mitigated, provide a justification showing
how the proposal is proportionate, necessary, and appropriate despite this.
Summary of significant negative impacts and how they can be mitigated or justified:
Depending on how the scheme is designed the EQIA has highlighted that there are impacts on various groups that
need to be considered during the development of the business case. This includes potential disproportionate
impacts on Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic groups, older people (50+) and people in social deprivation.
Summary of positive impacts / opportunities to promote the Public Sector Equality Duty:
Depending on how the scheme is designed there are likely to be a number of benefits for different protected
characteristic groups who often negative impacts of car use – such as congestion, poor air quality, traffic accidents
and unhealthy physical environments, whilst at the same time having more limited access and use of vehicles.

4.2 Action Plan
Use this section to set out any actions you have identified to improve data, mitigate issues, or maximise
opportunities etc. If an action is to meet the needs of a particular protected group please specify this.
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale
To review and update the EQIA through the development of the Jacob Pryor 2024-2025
business case

4.3 How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
How will you know if you have been successful? Once the activity has been implemented this equality impact
assessment should be periodically reviewed to make sure your changes have been effective your approach is still
appropriate.
A monitoring and evaluation strategy will be developed for the WPL scheme as part of the proposed business
case.

Step 5: Review
The Equality and Inclusion Team need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your EqIA. EqIAs
should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers on the equalities

Page 240
impact of the proposal. Please seek feedback and review from the Equality and Inclusion Team before requesting
sign off from your Director1.
Equality and Inclusion Team Review: Director Sign-Off: Alex Hearn, Director Economy of
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team Place

Date: 20/8/2024 Date: 22/08/2024

1 Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
Page 241
Environmental Impact Assessment [version 1.0]

Proposal title: Workplace Parking Levy
Project stage and type: ☒ Initial Idea Mandate ☐ Outline Business Case ☐ Full Business Case
☒ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☒ New ☐ Changing
☐ Other [please state] ☐ Already exists / review
Directorate: Growth and Regen, EoP Lead Officer name:
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role:

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of this Environmental Impact Assessment is to help you develop your proposal in a way that is
compliant with the council’s policies and supports the council’s strategic objectives under the One City Climate
Strategy, the One City Ecological Emergency Strategy and the latest Corporate Strategy.
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the project proposal process by someone with a good
knowledge of the project, the service area that will deliver it, and sufficient influence over the proposal to make
changes as needed.
It is good practice to take a team approach to completing the Environmental Impact Assessment. See further
guidance on completing this document. Please email environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk early for advice
and feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Please use plain English, avoiding jargon and
acronyms.

The Committee report sets out the current thinking around how a Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) would work and
the practical steps required to deliver one. The report also seeks approval to allocate funding for the development
of a business case for the scheme:

The aim of a WPL scheme is to tackle congestion by placing a charge upon the use of commuter workplace
parking places (WPPs). The parking places may have been free of charge to the employees for some time
previously. The aim is also to encourage employers to manage the number of free workplace parking places
that they provide, whilst promoting the use of sustainable transport. The introduction of a WPL has other
benefits associated with the reduction in the use of the car and increase in the use of alternative modes such
as walking, cycling and public transport e.g., improvements to health and the environment.

The details of the potential WPL scheme requires further work but essentially workplaces with parking places
would face an annual charge per parking place and the employer would decide whether to pass that
compulsory charge onto the employee or not. The parking charges earned from the scheme provide local
authorities with a ring-fenced source of revenue to fund Local Transport Plan policies and objectives (and the
associated transport schemes such as improved bus services). Specifically, the Transport Act 2000 Road User
Charging and Workplace Parking Levy Explanatory Note, states: “The Act enables local traffic authorities
Page 242
outside London to introduce road user charging and workplace parking levies to help tackle congestion and
use the revenue to directly or indirectly facilitate local transport policy goals of the licensing authority.”

1.2 Will the proposal have an environmental impact?
Could the proposal have either a positive or negative effects for the environment now or in the future? If ‘No’
explain why you are sure there will be no environmental impact, then skip steps 2-3 and request review by sending
this form to environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk

If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment.
☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

1.3 If the proposal is part of an options appraisal, has the environmental impact of each option
been assessed and included in the recommendation-making process?
If ‘Yes’ please ensure that the details of the environmental impacts of each option are made clear in the pros and
cons section of the project management options appraisal document.

☐ Yes ☐ No ☒ Not applicable [please select]

If ‘No’ explain why environmental impacts have not been considered as part of the options appraisal process.

Step 2: What kinds of environmental impacts might the project have?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying
potential impacts.

Does the proposal create any benefits for the environment, or have any adverse impacts?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our corporate environmental objectives and the wider One City Climate and Ecological Emergency
strategies.
Consider how the proposal creates environmental impacts in the following categories, both now and in the future.
Reasonable efforts should be made to quantify stated benefit or adverse impacts wherever possible.

Where the proposal is likely to have a beneficial impact, consider what actions would enhance those impacts. Where
the proposal is likely to have a harmful impact, consider whether actions would mitigate these impacts.

Enhancements or mitigation actions are only required when there is a likely impact identified. Remember that where
enhancements or mitigation actions are listed, they should be assigned to staff and appropriately resourced.

GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many categories)
The objectives of the WPL are to reduce congestion by placing a charge upon the use of commuter parking places.
The introduction of a fee will incentivise employers and employees to consider alternative means of commuting to
work (walk, wheel, cycle, public transport) that are more sustainable than car use. The revenue generated by the
scheme will be reinvested in making sustainable modes of transport more attractive which will in turn help to
drive down emissions and provide other environmental benefits.

Page 243
The WPL scheme will reduce climate change gases by providing an
ENV1 Carbon neutral: incentive for commuters to choose sustainable modes of transport
Emissions of climate over car use. Nottingham City Council is the only local authority to
Benefits
changing gases have introduced a WPL which has resulted in a 5.79% reduction in
transport emissions since 2012. Bristol’s scheme could achieve
BCC has committed to equivalent savings depending on the final design and scope of the
achieving net zero emissions scheme.
for its direct activities by
2025, and to support the city The revenue raised by the WPL will be reinvested into the transport
in achieving net zero by network to ensure that alternatives to car-based commuting are safe,
2030. reliable and price competitive.
Enhancing
Will the proposal involve Our transport business engagement team has a number of support
actions
transport, or the use of services available to employers and employees to promote use of
energy in buildings? Will the sustainable modes of transport and improve onsite infrastructure e.g.
proposal involve the loan bikes, bus taster tickets and match-funded grants for lockers and
purchase of goods or showers.
services? If the answer is yes
to either of these questions, Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
there will be a carbon There are no adverse impacts anticipated at this stage
impact.
Adverse
Consider the scale and impacts
timeframe of the impact,
particularly if the proposal
will lead to ongoing
N/A
emissions beyond the 2025
and 2030 target dates.
Mitigating
Further guidance actions
☐ No impact

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

ENV2 Ecological recovery:
Wildlife and habitats
BCC has committed to 30% Benefits
of its land being managed
for nature and to halve its
use of pesticides by 2030.

Consider how your proposal
can support increased space Enhancing
for nature, reduced use of actions
pesticides, reduce pollution
to waterways, and reduce
consumption of products Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
that undermine ecosystems
around the world.
Adverse
If your proposal will directly impacts
lead to a reduction in habitat
within Bristol, then consider

Page 244
how your proposed
mitigation can lead to a
biodiversity net gain. Be sure
Mitigating
to refer to quantifiable actions
changes wherever possible.

Further guidance
☒ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

The WPL will reduce the consumption of fossil fuels used to power
private vehicles as commuters are incentivised to switch to more
Benefits
sustainable modes of transport.
ENV3 A cleaner, low-waste
city: Consumption of
resources and generation of
waste The revenue raised by the WPL will be reinvested into the transport
network to ensure that alternatives to car-based commuting are safe,
reliable and price competitive.

Consider what resources will Enhancing
Our transport business engagement team has a number of support
actions
be used as a result of the services available to employers and employees to promote use of
proposal, how they can be sustainable modes of transport and improve onsite infrastructure e.g.
minimised or swapped for loan bikes, bus taster tickets and match-funded grants for lockers and
less impactful ones, where showers.
they will be sourced from,
and what will happen to any Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
waste generated

Adverse
impacts

Further guidance
Mitigating
☐ No impact actions

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

ENV4 Climate resilience:
The revenue raised by the WPL will be reinvested into the transport
Bristol’s resilience to the
network to ensure that alternatives to car-based commuting are safe,
effects of climate change
reliable and price competitive. By providing a greater range of viable
transport options for residents and visitors we are helping to increase
Bristol’s climate is already
the resilience of our transport network should one system fail as a
changing, and increasingly
result of extreme weather events.
frequent instances of
Benefits
extreme weather will
Investment in sustainable transport is often combined with
become more likely over
investment in improved flood mitigation measures such as
time.
Sustainable Urban Drainage Schemes and maintenance/enhancement
of flood alleviation assets. Moreover, projects will often create
Consider how the proposal
opportunities for additional tree planting (providing shade and
will perform during periods
reducing the impact of the urban heat island effect) and provision of
of extreme weather
benchesPage
for rest during
245 extreme heat.
(particularly heat and
flooding).

Consider if the proposal will
reduce or increase risk to
people and assets during
extreme weather events.
Consult with relevant internal teams to embed climate mitigation
Further guidance
Enhancing measures into all schemes delivered through WPL revenues.
☐ No impact actions

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Adverse
impacts

Mitigating
actions

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

By reducing the quantity of vehicles travelling into the city centre the
Statutory duty: Benefits WPL scheme will help to improve air quality where the problem is
Prevention of Pollution to most acute.
air, water, or land

Enhancing
actions
Consider how the proposal
will change the likelihood of
pollution occurring to air, Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
water, or land and what
steps will be taken to Adverse
prevent pollution occurring. impacts

Mitigating
Further guidance actions

☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Step 3: Action Plan
Use this section summarise and assign responsibility for any actions you have identified to improve data, enhance
beneficial, or mitigate negative impacts. Actions identified in section two can be grouped together if named
responsibility is under the same person.
Page 246
This action plan should be updated at each stage of the project. Please be aware that the Sustainable City and
Climate Change Service may use this action plan as an audit checklist during the project’s implementation or
operation.
Enhancing / mitigating action required Responsible Officer Timescale
James Morvan Post-OBC
Should the scheme be approved the Transport Business
Engagement Team can provide support to employees and
employers to incentivise a switch to more sustainable modes of
transport

Opportunities to enhance climate mitigation measures through Various PM’s Post-OBC
schemes delivered by WPL revenues.
Methodology to be agreed on how to measure effect on transport Various PMs Post-OBC
emissions in the City

Step 4: Review
The Sustainable City and Climate Change Service need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your
impact assessment. Assessments should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for
decision-makers on the environmental impact of the proposal.
Please seek feedback and review by emailing environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk before final submission of
your decision pathway documentation1.
Where impacts identified in this assessment are deemed significant, they will be summarised here by the Sustainable
City and Climate Change Service and must be included in the ‘evidence base’ section of the decision pathway cover
sheet.

Summary of significant beneficial impacts and opportunities to support the Climate, Ecological and Corporate
Strategies (ENV1,2,3,4):

BCC’s Environmental Impact Assessment has determined significant beneficial impacts from the proposal – The
combination of charges and revenue reinvestment in projects to encourage sustainable modes of transport will
encourage a modal shift to active travel with associated carbon reductions and other benefits to health and
environment.

Summary of significant adverse impacts and how they can be mitigated:

Environmental Performance Team Reviewer: Submitting author: Jacob Pryor

Nicola Hares – Environmental Performance Officer
Date: 27/08/2024 Date: 21/08/

1 Review by the Sustainable City and Climate Change Service confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers
Page
to consider the likely environmental impacts at this stage. 247
This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
Page 248
Updates automatically Updates automatically
Threat Risks
Does the
Status Current Risk Level risk exceed
Monetary Impact of Risk Council Risk
Risk Description the Financial Risk

Risk Rating
Appetite for the

Likelihood Risk Level
Risk Title Key Causes Key Consequences Risk Category Key Mitigations council's Exposure
Impact
risk type identified
risk
Open / Closed £k appetite?

Risk that the objectives of the
Lack of resource and or Reputational impact on the Production of a Communications Plan through Outline
Engagement and WPL are poorly communicated
robust Communications council and push back from Open Reputation Business Case Development identifying key 2 5 10 Medium £0 Cautious Yes £0.00
Communication with employers and employees
Plan impacted stakeholders stakeholders, methods and timing of relevant comms
leading to push back
Poor quality Outline
Undertake a costing and resource plan prior to
Insufficient financial and people Cost pressures and/or lack Business Case that is not fit
Programme/Project commissioning work to ensure suffciient resources and
Resources resources are allocated to the of planning to understand for purpose and/or Open 2 3 6 Medium Open No £0.00
Management finance is in place to deliver a high quality Outline
Outline Business Case Work staffing requirements extended timescales for
Busuiness Case to time and budget
delivery.
Lack of political support across
Production of a Communications Plan through Outline
parties contributes to delays
Lack of communication Ineffective or cancelled Programme/Project Business Case Development that ensures political
Political Support and/or objections that undermine Open 2 5 10 Medium Open No £0.00
with political stakeholders scheme Management stakeholders are kept informed of progress at key
scheme objectives and/or
milestones.
cancellation of the scheme
That the council's Outline Poor quality Outline
Business Case does not provide Business Case that is not fit Ensure that Legal Advice is sought early in the Outline
Lack of expertise and/or
Legal/Technical adequate technical and legal for purpose and/or Open Legal Busines Case process and that appropriate external 2 5 10 Medium Cautious Yes £0.00
lack of resource
information to progress the extended timescales for expertise is brought in to support the project.
scheme delivery.
£0.00

Page 249
Averse
Minimalist

Cautious
Open
Updates Automatically Updates Automatically
Opportunity Risks

Status Current Risk Level
Monetary Impact of Risk

Risk Rating
Financial Opportunity Exposure

Likelihood Risk Level
Opportunity Risk
Risk Risk Description Key Causes Key Consequence Risk Category Key Mitigations
Impact
Title
Open / Closed £k

Revenue generated by the
Improved walking,
Enhanced Investment WPL scheme will be Explore different strategies for re-investing WPL
cycling and public Financial
in Sustainable reinvested into Increased revenue Open revenue into the network and the potential to use 4 3 12 Medium £0.00
transport infrastructure Loss/Gain
Transport Sustainable Transport revenues to leverage in further investment
and services
Projects
0 FALSE £0.00
0 FALSE £0.00
0 FALSE £0.00
0 FALSE £0.00
0 FALSE £0.00
0 FALSE £0.00
0 FALSE £0.00
£0.00

Page 250
Threat Risks Opportunity Risks
Number of Open Risks 4 Number of Open Risks 1

CRITICAL 0 SIGNIFICANT 0

HIGH 0 HIGH 0

MEDIUM 4 MEDIUM 1

LOW 0 LOW 0

Page 251
Cost Risk Exposure £0.00 Cost Opportunity Exposure £0.00

Number of risks exceeding risk appetite 2
Number of risks within risk appetite 2
LIKELIHOOD AND IMPACT RISK RATING SCORING CRITERIA
Likelihood Guidance
Likelihood Ratings 1 to 4
Likelihood
1 2 3 4

Description Might happen on rare occasions. Will possibly happen, possibly on several occasions. Will probably happen, possibly at regular intervals. Likely to happen, possibly frequently.

Numerical Likelihood Less than 10% Less than 50% 50% or more 75% or more

Severity of Impact Guidance (Risk to be assessed against all of the Categories, and the highest score used in the matrix).

Impact Levels 1 to 7
Impact Category
1 3 5 7

Severe effect on service provision or a Corporate Extremely severe service disruption. Significant customer
Noticeable and significant effect (positive or negative) on service provision.
Strategic Plan priority area. opposition. Legal action.

Very limited effect (positive or negative) Effect could not be managed within a reasonable time
on service provision. Impact can be Effect may require considerable /additional resource frame or by a short-term allocation of resources and may
Service provision but will not require a major strategy change. require major strategy changes. The Council risks ‘special
managed within normal working
arrangements. measures’.

Effect may require some additional resource, but manageable in a reasonable time
Officer / Member forced to resign.
frame.

A more severe but manageable impact (positive or

Page 252
Noticeable (positive or negative) impact on the community or a more manageable
negative) on a significant number of vulnerable groups A lasting and noticeable impact on a significant number of
Communities Minimal impact on community. impact on a smaller number of vulnerable groups / individuals which is not likely to
/ individuals which is not likely to last more than twelve vulnerable groups / individuals.
last more than six months.
months.

No effect (positive or negative) on the Serious local discharge of pollutant or source of
Environmental Short term effect (positive or negative) on the natural and or built environment. Lasting effect on the natural and or built environment.
natural and built environment. community annoyance that requires remedial action.
Financial Loss / Gain Under £0.5m Between £0.5m - £3m Between £3m - £5m More than £5m

Fraud & Corruption Loss Under £50k Between £50k - £100k Between £100k - £1m More than £1m
No significant legal implications or action Criminal prosecution anticipated and or civil litigation (> 1
Legal Tribunal / BCC legal team involvement required (potential for claim). Criminal prosecution anticipated and / or civil litigation.
is anticipated. person).

Significant injury or ill health of citizens or colleagues causing short-term disability / Major injury or ill health of citizens or colleagues may Death of citizen(s) or colleague(s).
Personal Safety Minor injury to citizens or colleagues.
absence from work. result in. long term disability / absence from work. Significant long-term disability / absence from work.
Programme / Project Slippage causes significant delay to delivery of key
Significant issues threaten delivery of the entire project.
Management Minor delays and/or budget overspend project milestones; and/or major budget overspends.
Slippage causes significant delay to delivery of key project milestones, and/or
but can be brought back on schedule with
(Including developing budget overspends.
this project stage.
commercial enterprises)

No threat to delivery of the project on Major threat to delivery of the project on time and to
time and to budget and no threat to No threat to overall delivery of the project and the identified benefits / outcomes. budget, and achievement of one or more benefits / Could lead to project being cancelled or put on hold.
identified benefits / outcomes. outcomes.

Serious potential for enhancement of, or damage to, Highly significant potential for enhancement of, or damage
Significant public or partner interest although limited potential for enhancement of,
reputation and the willingness of other parties to to, reputation and the willingness of other parties to
or damage to, reputation.
collaborate or do business with the council. collaborate or do business with the council.

Minimal and transient loss of public or
Reputation partner trust. Contained within the
Dissatisfaction reported through council complaints procedure but contained within Dissatisfaction regularly reported through council Intense local, national and potentially international media
individual service.
the council. complaints procedure. attention.

Local MP involvement. Higher levels of local or national interest. Viral social media or online pick-up.

Some local media/social media interest. Higher levels of local media / social media interest. Public enquiry or poor external assessor report.
Agenda Item 11

Committee Report

PURPOSE: Final Decision Report

KEY OR NON-KEY DECISION: Non-key decision

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 12 September 2024
.
TITLE: 2024/25 P3 Finance Forecast Report – Transport and Connectivity Committee
Ward(s): City Wide

Officer presenting the report: Alex Hearn Job title: Director Economy Of Place

Committee Chair: Cllr Ed Plowden
Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: BCC Staff

Purpose of Report:

1. The Council Revenue and Capital budget for 2024/25 was agreed by Full Council on 21 February 2023.
This report presents to the Transport and Connectivity Committee the transport financial forecast at
Period 3 (P3) against the budget as at the end of June 2024. P3 was an exception reporting month
meaning the Council only reported material changes in the forecast.

Evidence Base:

2. The Transport function is divided between Highways and Traffic within the Management of Place division,
City Transport within Economy of Place. City Transport includes both Strategic City Transport and Local
and Sustainable Transport.

3. General Fund

Revenue

3.1. The revenue budgets for these areas are shown in the table below. The figures in brackets refer to
income rather than overspends.

Table 1 Summary Position
1
Version January 2024 Page 253
2024/25 Transport Revenue Budgets £’000
432 - Traffic and Highways Maintenance (15,035)
433 - Strategic City Transport 1,774
434 - Local and Sustainable Transport (1,794)
Total (15,055)

3.2. At P3 the Council forecasted a £5.4 million overspend for Growth and Regeneration driven by the
costs of providing accommodation to those experiencing homelessness. Both Strategic Transport and
Highways and Traffic Maintenance have contributed opportunities to offset risk within the wider
directorate and hold the overspend to that level and will be required to deliver more to achieve a
balanced budget across the Directorate cash limit.

Revenue Risks and Opportunities

3.3. The largest revenue challenge within these two areas is delivering increasing income targets. The
Council Revenue and Capital budget for 2024/25 included policy that income targets would, in
general, be increased by 6.7% (representing the 2023-24 rate of inflation). For parking incomes this
equated to an increase of just over £1m, which is particularly challenging given there was a deficit
against previous income targets in 2023/24. Proposals are being developed to increase parking
income through adjusting our multi-story and residential parking scheme tariffs.

3.4. In terms of opportunities, as in 2023/24 the Clean Air Zone funding is planned to apply to appropriate
costs within Traffic and Highways Maintenance and City Transport. The amount drawn down is
dependent on the actual cost at year end, based on 2023/24 this is likely to be in the region of £5m.
There is also an underspend of c. £1m on the street lighting budget created by reductions in demand
as the switch to LED lights has progressed. This underspend was intended to cover the first loan
repayment due on the capital cost of delivering the LED light project, however for this year on a one-
off basis this is being managed through unspent capital maintenance funding.

Capital

2
Version January 2024 Page 254
3.5. At P3 the Council adjusted the following programmes to align with the latest expected programme
delivery schedule.

Performance
Gross Expenditure by Programme Current Year (FY2024) - Period 3
to budget

Expenditure
Forecast
Expenditure
Ref Scheme Budget Forecast Variance
to date
to Date

£000s %
Transport and Connectivity
Committee

GR09 Clean Air Zone
5,581 75 4,714 (867) 1% 84%
Programme
GR14 Public Transport 8,813 724 12,090 3,277 8% 137%
GR15 Active Transport 6,609 873 8,211 1,601 13% 124%
GR18 Strategic Transport
8,215 393 5,669 (2,545) 5% 69%
Projects
PL10 Highways & Traffic
Infrastructure - 19,947 3,459 21,359 1,412 17% 107%
General
PL11A Cattle Market Road
site re- 573 78 1,855 1,282 14% 324%
development
Total Transport and Connectivity 53,096 5,879 57,256 4,161 11% 108%

3.6. The reasons for the variances between budget and forecast are detailed below:
3.6.1. GR09 - Clean Air Zone Programme. This is an underspend relating to an undersubscription to
the financial support package available to people adjusting to the Clean Air Zone. Plans are being
developed to utilise this funding to support the objectives of the zone.
3.6.2. GR14 - Public Transport. This is due to a forecast overspend against the Strategic Corridors
projects (City Centre and A4 Portway). The Council expects to receive additional funding from
the Combined Authority before the end of the year.
3.6.3. GR15 - Active Transport. This is due to a forecast overspend against the Park Row and King
Street for which the Council expects to receive additional funding from the Combined Authority.
There is also an overspend against the Bristol Family Cycling Centre for which a request for
additional funding will also be prepared.
3.6.4. GR18 - Strategic Transport. These budgets are to be reprofiled as the Arena delivery is delayed
and therefore expenditure on the infrastructure expenditure has changed.
3.6.5. PL10 - Highways and Traffic Infrastructure. Projects are progressing well with estimated spend
for planned works for 4 bridges that are grant funded being brought forward compared to that
originally profiled for later years.
3.6.6. PL11A - Cattle Market Road Site Redevelopment. The works to the Harbour Walkway are
delayed due to contractual dispute and now awaiting decision on harbour dredging.
4. That the Committee notes:
• The contents of report on the P3 forecast for the Transport and Connectivity Committee.

3
Version January 2024 Page 255
Corporate Strategy alignment:

1. The Corporate Strategy underpins the council’s budget

City Benefits:

1. Cross priority report that covers whole of council’s business

Consultation Details:

1. N/A
Background Documents:
Budget Report 2024/25

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background information and detail NO

4
Version January 2024 Page 256
Agenda Item 12
Non-key Decision Committee Report

PURPOSE: Non-key decision update report

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 12 September 2024

TITLE: Q1 2024/25 Corporate Risk Report
Officer presenting the report: Joachim Adenusi Title: Senior Risk and Insurance Officer

Committee Chair: Cllr Ed Plowden
Executive Director lead: John Smith – Executive Director Growth and Regeneration
Purpose of Report: The report provides an update on current significant strategic risks to achieving the
Council’s objectives, within the Transport and Connectivity Committee, as set in the Corporate Strategy
2022-2027 and summarises progress in managing the risks and actions being taken as at Quarter 1_2024-
25.
Evidence Base / Context
1. The Corporate Risk Report (CRR) is a key document in the council’s approach to the management of risk;
it captures strategic risks set out in the Corporate Strategy 2022-2027. It also provides a context through
which Directorates construct their own high-level risk assessments and is used to inform decision making
about business planning, budget setting, transformation, and service delivery.

2. The CRR provides assurance to management and Members that Bristol City Council’s significant risks have
been identified and arrangements are in place to manage those risks within the tolerance levels agreed.
It should be noted that ‘risk’, by definition, includes both threats and opportunities, which is reflected in
the CRR.

3. Ensuring that the Service Risk Registers (SRR), Directorate Risk Reports (DRR) and the Corporate Risk
Reports (CRR) are soundly based will help the council to ensure it is anticipating and managing key risks
to optimise the achievement of the council’s objectives and prioritise actions for managing those risks.

4. The registers and reports are a management tool. They need regular review to ensure that the occurrence
of obstacles or events that may put individual’s safety at harm, impact upon service delivery and the
council’s reputation are minimised, opportunities are maximised and when risks happen, they are
managed effectively to minimise the impact.

5. The CRR summary of risks is attached to this report at Appendix A1 and is the latest position following a
review by managers and Directors. The risks in Appendix A1 are presented in the order of severity, starting
with the highest scoring risks followed by lower scoring risks.

Summary of Corporate Risks:
6. Corporate Leadership Board (CLB) members noted the CRR as a working summary report of the critical
and significant risks from the Service Risk Registers as of 31st May 2024.

1
Version January 2024 Page 257
7. The CRR sets out the critical, significant, and high rated threats and opportunity risks. All other business
risks reside on the Service Risk Registers.

8. Further programme of work with clear instructions to colleagues was undertaken to review and revise
each CRR/DRR risk description, internal controls and mitigation plans and governance. The scope of this
work included where possible the identification of new risks and a fresh look to confirm ongoing risks are
current along with the actions to mitigate the risks.

9. Members of Growth and Regeneration Directorate reviewed the current CRRs and the DRRs on the 5th of
June 2024 to form the current CRR risks. On the 11 of June 2024, CLB members accepted the attached
CRR as a working summary report of the critical and significant risks from the Service Risk Registers.

10. The Q1 24-25 Transport and Connectivity Committee Corporate Risk Report (CRR) as at June 2024 contains
2 risks:
Threat Risks Opportunity Risks External / Contingency Risks
0 Critical
2 High Nil Nil
0 Medium

0 Improving Risks
0 Deteriorating Risks
0 Escalated Risks
0 De-escalated Risks
A summary of risks for this reporting period are set out below:

High Threat Risks
11. There are two High Threat risks.
▪ CRR43 - Lack of progress for Mass Transit may have on Impact on the city
▪ CRR58 - Possible failure to adequately maintain and replace the Highway, Traffic, Parking and Docks
infrastructure assets.

Static Risks
12. Both risks have scores that have remained static over the last 3 reporting cycles, including Q1 2024-25.
These risks are summarised in Appendix A2 of this report. During Q4, risk owners were challenged to
reduce the risk scores or justify why the scores cannot reduce. These reasons are stated in the ‘Summary
of Progress’ contained in the table for each risk in Appendix A1.

Additional Information:
13. For more detail on individual risks and their management, please see the attached Appendix A1.
14. The closed risks are now reflected within individual risks across the Council’s Service Risk Registers.
15. All risks on the CRR have management actions in place.
16. It is not possible to eliminate the potential of failure entirely without significant financial and social costs.
The challenge is to make every reasonable effort to mitigate and manage risks effectively, and where
failure occurs, to learn and improve.
17. Completeness of risk information, including potential financial impact, will be an area of focus moving into
the next quarter.
18. Risks are escalated to the Corporate Risk Report (CRR) if the risk scores higher than a 20 or if a risk is
determined by CLB to remain on the corporate risk report due to monitoring its significance to the councils
aims and objective.
2
Version January 2024 Page 258
Officer Recommendations:
That the Transport and Connectivity Committee note this report.

Corporate Strategy alignment: Corporate Strategy alignment: This report covers all areas of what Bristol City
Council does, and therefore aligns with all themes of the Corporate Strategy. In particular, taking safe but
proportionate approaches to risk aligns with Corporate Strategy Theme 7: Effective Development
Organisation.

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background information and detail YES
Appendix A1 – Q1 Transport and Connectivity Committee - Corporate Risk Report 2024-2025
Appendix A2 – Q1 2024-2025 Transport and Connectivity Committee Static Risks Corporate Risk Report

3
Version January 2024 Page 259
Appendix A1 – Transport and Connectivity Committee - Corporate Risk Register Q1 2024-2025 as at June 2024

Threat Risk Performance Summary
Page Q2 Rating Q2 Matrix Q3 Rating Q3 Matrix Q4 Rating Q4 Matrix Q1 Rating Q1 Matrix
Risk Number (23/24) (23/24) (23/24) (23/24) (23/24) (23/24) (24/25) (24/25)
21 21 21 21
CRR58 - Possible failure to adequately
maintain and replace the Highway, Traffic, 3
Parking and Docks infrastructure assets

20 20 20 20
CRR43 - Lack of progress for Mass Transit
2
may have on Impact on the city

Risk Trend Key
Arrow Description
The risk rating has improved from the previous quarter, having reduced in its severity.

The risk rating has deteriorated from the previous quarter, having increased in its severity.

Page 260
The risk rating has not changed from the previous quarter.

1
Appendix A1 – Transport and Connectivity Committee - Corporate Risk Register Q1 2024-2025 as at June 2024

Threat Risks

Threat Risk Trend Current Risk Assessment Risk Tolerance Level
Risk Title: CRR43 - Lack of progress for Mass
Transit may have on Impact on the city Constant
Description: Failure of regional authorities to
20 10
agree way forward for development of a Mass Likelihood = 4 Likelihood = 2
Transit system. No sign up to results of feasibility Impact = 5 Impact = 5
study.

Risk Causes:
1. Resourcing Business Case development Existing Controls Mitigating Actions
2. Lack of political consensus Control Action Title Due Date Progress
3. Viability of Business Case Mass Transit Directors Board - Monthly board in Senior staff allocated to project March 2025 60%
4. Lack of DfT support place at regional level to ensure appropriate senior
officer engagement with project
Regular internal briefings - Regular briefings with

Page 261
senior managers and administration
Risk Consequences:
-Reputational impact.
-Long term congestion and air pollution increase.
-Regional productivity reduced.
-Threat to investment across the city.

Risk Owner(s): Executive Director Growth and
Regeneration, Director Economy of Place.

Committee: Transport and Connectivity Summary of Progress:
No change to risk rating, no further progress on scheme, updates from combined authority awaited re progress of SOBC/OBC.

Strategic Theme: Our Organisation, Wellbeing.

2
Appendix A1 – Transport and Connectivity Committee - Corporate Risk Register Q1 2024-2025 as at June 2024

Threat Risk Trend Current Risk Assessment Risk Tolerance Level
Risk Title: CRR58 Possible failure to adequately maintain
and replace the Highway, Traffic, Parking and Docks Constant
infrastructure assets
Description: 21 10
Deterioration of highway condition. Additional roadworks Likelihood = 3 Likelihood = 2
resulting in congestion and air pollution. . Impact = 7 Impact = 5

Risk Causes
Under investment in replacements and upgrades of Existing Controls Mitigating Actions
highway and traffic assets Control Action Title Due Date Progress
Climate changes are accelerates the depreciation of the Depreciation modelling identifies the severity of the risk Request for funding to be included
asset to Highway and Traffic assets in the medium financial plan. March 2025 75%
Lack of funding from Central Government and local funding
Assets ageing beyond design life. Lifecycle modelling and scheme selection using data Ensure all opportunities in planning
sets. are taken to include highway repairs
July 2024 5%
as part of developers works are

Page 262
Risk based to seeking additional funding (Challenge included.
funds) Request for funding to be included
March 2025 75%
in the medium financial plan.
Risk Consequences: Undertaking digital inspections which provides video Take all opportunities to include
1. Multi-storey carpark closure footage of the strategic network to ensure all safety March 2025 20%
maintenance in major projects
2. Multi-storey carpark structural failure defects are identified for the resilient network to keep Ensure Senior leaders are aware of
3. Harbour Bridge and Wall Structural Failure the city moving." the pressures, therefore at the stage
4. Failure to safeguard against significant injury/death. September
of bidding for CRSTS 2 a bigger 40%
5. Litigation from third party aggravated or who have suffered loss, 2025
due to non treatment of a perceived collision site or other proportion of funding is allocated to
Highways defect. maintenance
6. Traffic congestion and air pollution.
7. Increase in complaints and request for repairs diverts resources
from core business.
8. Budget shocks and finance burden to the authority.

Risk Owner(s):
Executive Director Growth and Regeneration
Committee: Transport and Connectivity Summary of Progress:
No change from previous assessment. now the new administration is in place we can progress some of the actions by
Strategic Theme: Well Connected making the new administration aware of the pressures.

3
Appendix A1 – Transport and Connectivity Committee - Corporate Risk Register Q1 2024-2025 as at June 2024

Risk Scoring Matrix

Page 263

4
Appendix A1 – Transport and Connectivity Committee - Corporate Risk Register Q1 2024-2025 as at June 2024

LIKELIHOOD AND IMPACT RISK RATING SCORING
Likelihood Guidance
Likelihood Ratings 1 to 4
Likelihood
1 2 3 4
Will possibly happen, possibly on several
Description Might happen on rare occasions. Will probably happen, possibly at regular intervals. Likely to happen, possibly frequently.
occasions.
Numerical Likelihood Less than 10% Less than 50% 50% or more 75% or more
Severity of Impact Guidance (Risk to be assessed against all of the Categories, and the highest score used in the matrix).
Impact Levels 1 to 7
Impact Category
1 3 5 7
Severe effect on service provision or a Corporate Extremely severe service disruption. Significant customer
Noticeable and significant effect (positive or Strategic Plan priority area. opposition. Legal action.
Very limited effect (positive or
negative) on service provision. Effect could not be managed within a reasonable time frame
negative) on service provision. Effect may require considerable /additional
Service provision or by a short-term allocation of resources and may require
Impact can be managed within resource but will not require a major strategy
Effect may require some additional resource, but major strategy changes. The Council risks ‘special
normal working arrangements. change.
manageable in a reasonable time frame. measures’.
Officer / Member forced to resign.
Noticeable (positive or negative) impact on the A more severe but manageable impact (positive or
community or a more manageable impact on a negative) on a significant number of vulnerable A lasting and noticeable impact on a significant number of
Communities Minimal impact on community.
smaller number of vulnerable groups / individuals groups / individuals which is not likely to last more vulnerable groups / individuals.
which is not likely to last more than six months. than twelve months.
Serious local discharge of pollutant or source of
No effect (positive or negative) on Short term effect (positive or negative) on the
Environmental community annoyance that requires remedial Lasting effect on the natural and or built environment.
the natural and built environment. natural and or built environment.

Page 264
action.
Financial Loss / Gain Under £0.5m Between £0.5m - £3m Between £3m - £5m More than £5m
Fraud & Corruption Loss Under £50k Between £50k - £100k Between £100k - £1m More than £1m
No significant legal implications or Tribunal / BCC legal team involvement required Criminal prosecution anticipated and / or civil Criminal prosecution anticipated and or civil litigation (> 1
Legal
action is anticipated. (potential for claim). litigation. person).
Significant injury or ill health of citizens or Major injury or ill health of citizens or colleagues Death of citizen(s) or colleague(s).
Minor injury to citizens or
Personal Safety colleagues causing short-term disability / absence may result in. long term disability / absence from
colleagues. Significant long-term disability / absence from work.
from work. work.
Minor delays and/or budget
Slippage causes significant delay to delivery of key
overspend but can be brought Slippage causes significant delay to delivery of key
project milestones; and/or major budget
Programme / Project back on schedule with this project project milestones, and/or budget overspends.
overspends. Significant issues threaten delivery of the entire project.
Management stage.
(Including developing No threat to delivery of the project
Major threat to delivery of the project on time and Could lead to project being cancelled or put on hold.
commercial enterprises) on time and to budget and no No threat to overall delivery of the project and the
to budget, and achievement of one or more
threat to identified benefits / identified benefits / outcomes.
benefits / outcomes.
outcomes.
Significant public or partner interest although Serious potential for enhancement of, or damage Highly significant potential for enhancement of, or damage
limited potential for enhancement of, or damage to, to, reputation and the willingness of other parties to to, reputation and the willingness of other parties to
reputation. collaborate or do business with the council. collaborate or do business with the council.
Minimal and transient loss of public Dissatisfaction regularly reported through council Intense local, national and potentially international media
Reputation or partner trust. Contained within Dissatisfaction reported through council complaints complaints procedure. attention.
the individual service. procedure but contained within the council.
Higher levels of local or national interest. Viral social media or online pick-up.
Local MP involvement.
Some local media/social media interest. Higher levels of local media / social media interest. Public enquiry or poor external assessor report.

5
Appendix A2 – Transport and Connectivity Committee - Static Risk Report Post Q1 2024-2025 as at June 2024 Corporate Risk Register

Static Risk Definition: A Corporate Risk where the score has not changed for at least three consecutive quarters.

Threat Risks – Static Risk Summary
Q2 Rating Q2 Matrix Q3 Rating Q3 Matrix Q4 Rating Q4 Matrix Q1 Rating Q1 Matrix
Risk (23/24) (23/24) (23/24) (23/24) (23/24) (23/24) (24/25) (24/25)
21 21 21 21
CRR58 - Possible failure to adequately
maintain and replace the Highway, Traffic,
Parking and Docks infrastructure assets

20 20 20 20
CRR43 - Lack of progress for Mass Transit
may have on Impact on the city

Legend
Code Description Number of Risks
Was static in Q4 23/24 and remains static in Q1 24/25 i.e. for at least 2

Page 265
Remained Static in Q1 four consecutive quarters.

Total 2

Risk Trend Key
Arrow / Symbol Description
The risk rating has improved from the previous quarter, having
reduced in its severity.
The risk rating has deteriorated from the previous quarter, having
increased in its severity.
The risk rating has not changed from the previous quarter.

1
