Bristol City Council
Minutes of the Transport & Connectivity
Policy Committee

19 March 2026 at 5.00 pm

Members Present:-
Councillors: Ed Plowden (Chair), Graham Morris (Vice-Chair), Rob Bryher, Nicholas Coombes,
Emma Edwards, Tom Renhard, Tim Rippington, Kaz Self and David Wilcox

Officers in Attendance:-
John Smith (Executive Director: Growth & Regeneration), Patsy Mellor (Director, Management of Place)
and Adam Crowther (Head of City Transport)

1 Welcome, Introductions and Safety Information

The Chair welcomed all attendees to the meeting and explained the emergency evacuation procedure.
The Chair asked the Committee members to introduce themselves

2 Apologies for Absence and Substitutions

There were no apologies

3 Declarations of Interest

There were none.

4 Minutes of the Previous Meeting

The minutes of the previous meeting were agreed as accurate.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

5 Chair's Announcements

The Chair provided the following updates:
• Delegated Officer Decision Notices have now been published on the Council’s website.
• Councillor Bryher, Chair of the Parking Kerbside Strategy Task and Finish Group, updated the
Committee on the Group’s ongoing work. He confirmed that the next phase will involve drafting
the strategy, with a report expected to be brought to the Committee in the autumn.

6 Public Forum

The Committee noted that the following public forum had been received.

Public Petitions
There were no public petitions presented to the Committee at this meeting.

Public Statements
36 statements were received and noted as follows:

Ref No Name Title
01 Jon Nicholls Objections to RPS changes
02 Joseph Thomas Support safety for children and a better city.
03 Judith Worthington Against South Bristol liveable neighbourhood on
grounds of safety to cyclists and pedestrians
04 Jacqueline Perkins Opposition to SBLN
05 Alexandra Veitch Please provide a viable alternative to car travel
06 Zoe Mack SBLN - consultation
07 Kelly Smallcombe Is the South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
Optimised for the “Average Traveller” at the Expense
of Women?
08 Haydn Gill Supporting safer streets for all
09 Anna Haydock-Wilson 20MPH forCumberland Road, Hotwell Road and
Merchants Road
10 Suzanne Audrey, Chair of Support for 20mph speed limits
TRESA
11 Ian Pond - Bristol Cycling Bristol Cycling Campaign supports the 20mph Review
Campaign (Item 8)

12 Rose Gray Support reduction of 20mph on Hotwell Rd &
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Merchants Rd
13 Carol Fox EBLN
14 Sarah Halligan Can adjoining sections of Brunel Way/HotwellsRd be
reduced from 40mph to 30mph to support the
proposed 20mph limit on hotwells rdh
15 Felicity Burdett Support of speed reduction to Merchants Road and
Cumberland Basin Road
16 Melissa Topping EBLN Statement on the Systematic Exclusion and
Rights of Access for Disabled Residents
17 Satyen Joshi SBLN - EMERGING THEMES IN SOUTHVILLE
18 Lynda Keeys South Bristol Livable Neighbourhood proposals and
general transport plans
19 Katherine Bridget Grant 20 MPH for Hotwell road

20 Matt Edwards Support for Hotwells Road Speed Reduction
21 Elise Cole Statement in Support of 20mph Speed Limit
Proposals – Hotwells and Harbourside
22 Elizabeth Forrester Parent’s statement in support of proposal to reduce
speed limit to 20mph on Hotwells rd and
surrounding areas
23 Jule Mulder Speed reduction Hotwell Road
24 Councillor Patrick Support for 20mph Roads in Hotwells & Harbourside
McAllister
25 Professor Albert Sanchez- Strong support for reduction to 20mph around
Graells Hotwells Primary School
26 Mark James Speed Restriction surrounding Hotwells school
27 David Redgewell Transport Issues
28 Brendon Taylor Bus service cuts in Stapleton, stakeholders in villages
of Frenchay, Stapleton and Eastville with NHS farm
facilities Burden Neurological hospital
29 Rosa Kell Bus Services
30 Amber Eastman A healthy city - The LTN paradox
31 Councillor Serena Ralston Agenda item 8. 20 mph review Cllr Serena Ralston,
Clifton Down: Statement: ‘Make our roads safer’
32 Elizabeth Newton South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
33 Roger Gimson, Bristol Road Safety and 20mph Review
Walking Alliance
34 Jesse Zyla 90 Faded Signs around St Lukes Road
35 Megs Smith Bristol's Liveable Neighbourhood Schemes
36 Caroline Dunn You have WASTED OUR MONEY.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Statements 6, 10, 24, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 35 were presented to the Committee.

Public Forum Questions

A total of 80 questions were received as follows:

Ref No Name Title
01, 02 & Mr Shaban Ali 01 – EBLN Monitoring Report Q1
03 02 – EBLN Monitoring Report Q2
03 – EBLN Monitoring Report Q3
04, 05 & Jan Ratcliffe 04 – Residential sacrifice streets are unfair on those
06 residents
05 – Community street parties and roads selected
for main routes
06 - What steps are being planned for worst case
scenarios congestion
07 Alec Jennings Road Freedom
08, 09 & Catherine Mellor 08 – SBLN Revised proposals to include APNR
10 cameras
09 – SBLN use of APNR cameras
10 - Use of APNR cameras in SBLN
11 Richard Newnham SBLN co-design
12, 13 & Judith Worthington 12 – Public information relating to reason traffic in
14 North Street increasing
13 – What reassurances and guarantees are there
that there will be no increase in response times for
emergency services to all areas of Southville if the
SBLN is introduced
14 - Why should residents have to pay for something
they do not need or want
15, 16 & Zoe Mack 15 – Surveying Southville
17 16 – Future consultation
17 - Pollution monitor
18, 19 & Evy Loizou 18 - EBLN Monitoring Report Misleading Data
20 19 - EBLN impact data on local businesses
SBLN proposals: impact data on lower-income
residents
21, 22 & Mark Smallcombe 21 - Winners and Losers – SBLN
23 22 - Why does the SBLN (designed by men) fail to
account for primary women's problems?
23 – Did the council hold any data prior to the SBLN
plans or was it just on feelings and filling someone's
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

CV?
24, 25 & Kelly Smallcombe 24 - When Transport Policy Optimises for the
26 Average, Who Gets Left Behind? Women and the
SBLN
25 - Evidence-Led Policy or Policy-Led Evidence?
26 – Cherry Picking Data - a BCC Expertise
27, 28 & James Alexander 27 - Failures of the Transport Dept
29 28 - Failures of the Freedom of Information Dept
29 – Failures of the Complaints Dept
30, 31 & Alison Bramall 30 – Traffic counters
32 31 – SBLN access
32 - Modal filters/works at Bedminster Bridge
roundabout
33a, 33b & Matt Sanders Inconsistent Bus Gate Signage
33c
34 Dan Ackroyd Data regarding traffic flow
35 Megs Smith Council coercion or democracy?
36,37 & 38 David Redgewell Transport and connectivity committee 19th March
2026
39, 40 & Elizabeth Newton 39- SBLN Consultation Data Query?
41 40 & 41- SBLN - post consultation survey
42,43 & 44 SATYEN JOSHI 42- SBLN - CO DESIGN PHASE
43- SBLN - EXPENDITURE TO DATE AND HOW £1.32
MILLION EXTRA FUNDING IS INTENDED TO BE SPENT
44- LTNs: BENEFITS TO COST RATIO

45,46 & 47 Lynda Keeys 45- Air Quality Monitoring and CAZ
46- South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood (SBLN)
47- SBLN
48 & 49 Satwant Phull 48 & 49- EBLN
50, 51 & Rosa Kell Transport connectivity committee 19th March 2026
52
53, 54 & Helen Hughes 53 & 54- Current EBLN consultations
55 55- Current EBLN TRO consultation
56, 57 & Anne Dockery 56- LTN : Air Quality and Carbon
58 57- Evidence & Data Transparency SBLN
58-SBLN
59 Abi Salinger 59- SBLN: The Gender Divide/Low Income
Households and Employment

60,61, & Teri Bramah 60- Can Bcc divulge the level of support for vs
62 opposition against the SBLN, in the recent Autumn
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

25 consultation survey? And if not now, then when?
61- SBLN and Playing Out, annual (frequent) street
party events
62- Publishing of Data gathered and used to assess
specific low-income household vehicle needs in
planning of SBLN
63 Ian Pond 63- Cycling Provision alongside the A4018 on the
Bristol Downs
64, 65 & Brendan Taylor Cabinet meeting 18th March 2026
66
67 & 68 Susan Marshall 67- SBLN survey of road use
68- Length of journeys in Southville before and after
SBLN imposition
69 Dr Tony Hoare Update on the introduction of parking charges to ten
currently free-to-use car parks
70, 71 & Robert Harakis 76 – Which Traffic Surveys are relevant?
72 77 – How was the Data compiled?
78 - Or is there NO relevant traffic data…?
73 Pippa Nesbit Public Forum — Order of Receipt
74 & 75 Councillor Richard Eddy 20mph Review
76, 77 & Caroline Dunn 73 – fix my street frequently doesn't work or doesn't
78 achieve anything.
74 – Denmark Street Access Hippodrome
75 – Denmark Street Access Hippodrome

Those who attended the meeting were invited to ask up to two supplementary questions. The following
responses were given:

Q15, 16 & 17 – Zoe Mack
Officers confirmed that teams had visited the area to carry out the necessary assessments and surveys
prior to developing the proposed schemes. The cost information relating to the design work was not
available at the meeting. Officers advised that this information would be shared, subject to commercial
sensitivity considerations. ACTION: Officers to provide cost information to the participant in writing.

Q33a, 33b & 33c – Matt Sanders
Officers confirmed that they had reviewed Mr Sanders’ report and reiterated that the signage at the
Cumberland Bus Gate has been assessed as compliant. Officers advised that they would consider the
proposals raised in the report; however, any potential changes to signage or street furniture would need
to be evaluated in the context of ensuring the appropriate use of public funds, given that the Bus Gate is
already deemed compliant.

Q34 – Dan Ackroyd
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Officers confirmed that the data provided was sourced from TomTom Move, which uses GPS information
from private cars. The dataset primarily illustrates vehicle movements originating from Park Street, but it
does not include sufficient detail to distinguish taxi journeys from other private car trips.

Q35 – Megs Smith
The Chair disagreed with the suggestion that residents’ comments would not be taken into account when
reaching a decision.

Q53, 54 & 55 – Helen Hughes
Officers confirmed that the intention of Liveable Neighbourhood schemes is to encourage a shift towards
more trips being made by sustainable transport modes. The schemes do not prevent anyone from
making car journeys they previously undertook. Officers also explained that the use of Automatic
Number Plate Recognition (ANPR) cameras for moving traffic enforcement is one option that could
improve monitoring, particularly in locations where maintaining quicker and easier access for emergency
vehicles is important, compared with physical point-closure bollards.

Q64, 65 & 66 – Brendan Taylor
Officers confirmed that funding available to support bus services is limited, while costs increase and
demand is high. As a result, difficult decisions are required, and an assessment has been undertaken to
evaluate the benefits of different services, considering factors such as passenger usage and the
availability of alternative routes nearby. Officers added that the Council will continue to work with the
Combined Authority on options for bus reform. They also noted that emergency bus contracts currently in
place provide additional time to review these services and assess their deliverable benefits.

Q50, 51 & 52 – Rosa Kell
Officers confirmed that information on uncollectable debt arising from CAZ infringements had been
reported to the Strategy & Resources Policy Committee. ACTION: A link to the report would be circulated
to the participant.

7 Road Safety Task and Finish Group - closure report

The Committee received a non key decision update report outlining the key outcomes of the Road Safety
Task and Finish Group.

The Chair of the Group, Councillor Wilcox and the Road Safety Group Manager introduced the report.
During discussion, Members raised the following points:

• The Regional Road Safety Partnership is in the process of finalising its terms of reference and is
working collaboratively with local authorities across the region to agree shared priorities.
• Ongoing engagement is taking place with the stakeholders listed in the report, as well as
additional groups, to further develop the work and the emerging strategy.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

• Members noted that the ambitious targets set out in the report will require difficult decisions and
clear, tangible actions to ensure progress in the desired direction and timeframes.
• Members emphasised the imprortance of understanding public perceptions of safety at different
locations. They highlighted the need for this to be visualised within the strategy alongside
collision data, noting that the ‘feeling of safety’ is subjective and requires further data and
understanding within this data led strategy.
• It was noted that the Government has indicated an intention to bring forward legislation relating
to micromobility, although no definitive timeframe has yet been provided.
• The concept of gender budgeting would need further exploration and explanation within the
context of the Road Safety Strategy.
• Additional stakeholder feedback will be sought from motorcyclists; relevant contacts have been
identified and engagement is planned over the coming weeks.

Following the discussion;

The Committee for Transport and Connectivity noted the information provided in the closure report
(Appendix A) which will inform the drafting of a road safety strategy. The strategy will be brought to
Transport and Connectivity Committee in due course for approval.

8 20 mph Review

The Committee considered a report that updated the Committee on the 20mph Review, including an
evidence review and technical assessment. The report sought approval to launch a six-week public
engagement on the outcomes of that technical assessment which would invite the public and further
stakeholder and councillor input on the proposals to introduce a 20mph speed limit on 97 roads identified
in the technical assessment.

This was a key decision report as it impacts 2 or more wards.

The Head of City Transport introduced and outlined the report.

Following Members clarification on elements of the report, officers confirmed the following points:

• A comprehensive consultation process is planned, with ongoing engagement with Councillors.
Officers will work with the Chair to ensure all issues are fully captured and explored.
• Officers hope to receive detailed feedback from the bus companies to better understand how
lower speed limits in specific locations may affect bus journey times. While operators have
previously raised broader concerns about the concept of reduced speed limits, officers now
anticipate evidence-based, locality-specific feedback on journey time impacts as part of the
consultation.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

• The proposals relate to approximately 59 miles of road – around 5% of the overall network – yet
these routes account for 30% of serious and fatal casualties, reflecting their high use by
pedestrians, cyclists and motor vehicles. Officers noted that reducing vehicle speeds would help
more people feel comfortable walking and cycling.
• The proposal to delegate the decision to the Executive Director, Growth and Regeneration in
consultation with the Chair, was intended to expedite the process which otherwise would mean
returning to Committee in September. Committee Members asked officers to explore whether
Committee dates could be moved to enable an earlier decision.
• The police have been a key stakeholder throughout the development of the proposals and are
likely to comment on individual road proposals. Officers note that the case for 20mph limits had
evolved significantly since last proposed in 2014, further work could be supported by the
developing work of the Regional Road Safety Partnership.
• The greatest safety benefits from adopting 20mph limits would arise on busier/faster residential
main roads, which act as key cycling and walking corridors that currently lack other significant
planned safety improvements.
• Members asked to receive the results of the public consultation and noted that the level of public
support will not be known until the consultation is undertaken. Members expressed the view
that, if consideration of the consultation outcomes requires a political decision, then the matter
should return to Committee.
• The consultation will record where respondents live in relation to the roads they comment on, so
this information can form part of the evaluation.
• The 20mph website has been updated ahead of the consultation to assist in providing information
to the public. Officers will work with the Communications Team on a planned comms campaign.
ACTION: Briefing on comms activities to be sent to T&C Councillors.

Following the discussion, report recommendation 1 was noted.

Councillor Plowden moved report recommendation 2 and it was seconded by Councillor Wilcox.

On being put to the vote, recommendation 2 was CARRIED unanimously.

Councillor Plowden moved report recommendation 3 and it was seconded by Councillor Wilcox.

On being put to the vote, recommendation 3 FELL (2 voting for, 7 voting against)

It was APPROVED that;

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:

1. Noted the outcomes of the review of evidence and best practice and the technical road by-road
assessment outlined in Appendix A.

2. Approved launching a six-week public engagement on the outcomes of that technical assessment.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Recommendation 3 was not approved:

3. Authorise the Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of
Transport and Connectivity Committee, to consider the outcomes of the public engagement and,
informed by this, make a delegated decision on which of the proposals should or should not proceed to
the statutory Traffic Regulation Order (TRO) process, which includes further statutory consultation.

9 Incentive Funding

The Committee considered a report that sought approval to accept and spend the proposed Incentive
funding allocation from West of England Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA) as part of the City Region
Sustainable Transport Settlement (CRSTS).

This was a key decision report as it related to a decision involving over £500k and affected 2 or more
wards.

The Director, Management of Place introduced the report and provided an overview of the funding. The
funding was awarded in 2024 as Incentive Funding. Following Bristol City Council’s successful
demonstration of compliance with best practice in preventative highways maintenance techniques the
funding can now be drawn down. The funding has been, and will continue to be, used to deliver highways
maintenance schemes drawn from the priority list of roads requiring intervention, in line with recognised
best-practice standards.

It was clarified that page 2 of the report should read “inspecting every road and footway every year. Over
1200km of roads and 2500km of footways.”

Members emphasised the importance of timely intervention and effective maintenance to avoid the need
for repeat visits and additional remedial work.

The report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Renhard.

On being put to the vote the recommendations were CARRIED (unanimously).

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:

1. Noted the proposed indicative funding allocations of £2,467,388 Incentive funds

2. Authorised the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of
Transport and Connectivity Committee, to take all steps required to accept and spend up to of
£2,467,388 of Incentive funds.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

3. Authorised the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of
Transport and Connectivity Committee to take all steps necessary to procure and award any contracts
(including any contracts over the key decision threshold) necessary to deliver the works associated with
this funding.

4. Authorised the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of
Transport and Connectivity Committee to make reasonable changes to the programme of works to
ensure delivery of the programme, in accordance with the Council’s scheme of financial delegations.

10 Workplace Parking Levy Update report

The Committee received a report for information updating the committee on progress with the
Workplace Parking Levy Outline Business Case (OBC) and to outline progress on key project milestones.

The Head of City Transport introduced the report. During discussion, Members raised the following
points:

• The reduced project timeline was noted, following delays that had impacted earlier stages of the
work. Officers confirmed that the consultants had agreed to the revised schedule.
• Due to a relatively low number of responses received from businesses, additional data collection
took place via door-to-door engagement. The data gathered will feed into modelling and
forecasting to help shape potential scheme options for future Committee consideration.
• Officers confirmed that the information being sought includes the the number of parking spaces
businesses hold, their frequency of use, and business views on how revenue generated should be
reinvested within the city.
• Members highlighted the potential impacts on workers, including any risk to jobs or business
relocation. They streesed that any proposed exemptions or boundary changes would need to be
communicated early, particularly regarding the potential impact on schools.
• It was suggested that the next update report should include further consideration of the IT
implications. Although less substantial than those associated with the Clean Air Zone (CAZ), some
processing requirements must be expected.
• Members noted that the Transport Infrastructure Plan (formerly known as the Movement Plan)
would play an important role in the context of the scheme.
• Members emphasised the importance of developing the Investment Strategy for Workplace
Parking Levy revenue, recognising it as a crutcial part of the project. They requested cross-party
engagement in shaping the Investment Strategy, with the aim of securing broad political support
for how any revenue would be deployed, and clarity of the final proposals.

Following the discussion;

The Committee for Transport and Connectivity noted this update report.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

11 Policy Committee Work Programme Setting - Outcome Report

The Committee received a report for information presenting the outcomes of the six monthly work
programme setting workshop held on 29 January 2026 with particular focus on the coming 2026-2027
municipal year.

The Policy Committee Officer introduced the report. In discussion, the following points were clarified:

• In relation to the Cohesive Street Furniture Licensing Policy, it was confirmed that the Chairs of
the Public Health & Communities Policy Committee, the Licensing Committee, and the Economy &
Skills Policy Committee would be invited to the relevant T&C Policy Committee Chairs Briefing
(PCCB) for further discussion.
• Regarding the roll out Sheffield Stands to more communities topic, a paper would be presented
to the T&C PCCB outlining the planned process and timeline, which can then be communicated to
Members.
• Concerning the Feasibility Study for establishing a municipal bus company, officers confirmed
that the related work is currently being undertaken by the Mayoral Combined Authority (MCA). It
was noted that Bristol City Council should await the outcome of that work before considering its
own position.
• On value-for-money roadworks, there had been a Member request for an initial briefing about
how maintenance is prioritised and delivered, followed by a further briefing session regarding how
officers assess new techniques and initiate innovative solutions. (ACTION: PCO to arrange
Members’ briefing sessions.)
• The ‘Fix My Street’ tool is due for procurement renewal within the next 1–2 years. The Chair
suggested evaluation takes place to gather the views of Councillors and alongside, consider
improvements to communication processes.
• The suggestion regarding Equalities: Women in Transport / a digital reporting mechanism for
sexual harassment on public transport was welcomed.

Following the discussion,

The Committee for Transport and Connectivity noted the work programme update.

Meeting ended at 7.30 pm

CHAIR __________________
