Equality Impact Assessment [version 2.12]

Title: Workplace Parking Levy – Outline Business Case Development
☒ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☒ New
☐ Other [please state] ☐ Already exists / review ☐ Changing
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Jacob Pryor
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Transport Policy, Bidding
and Data Group Manager

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of an Equality Impact Assessment is to assist decision makers in understanding the impact of proposals
as part of their duties under the Equality Act 2010. Detailed guidance to support completion can be found here
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com).
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the process by someone with a good knowledge of the
proposal and service area, and sufficient influence over the proposal. It is good practice to take a team approach to
completing the equality impact assessment. Please contact the Equality and Inclusion Team early for advice and
feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Describe who it is aimed at and the intended aims /
outcomes. Where known also summarise the key actions you plan to undertake. Please use plain English, avoiding
jargon and acronyms. Equality Impact Assessments are viewed by a wide range of people including decision-makers
and the wider public.
The Committee report set out the current thinking around how a Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) would work and
the practical steps required to deliver one. The report also seeks approval to allocate funding for the development
of a business case for the scheme:

The aim of a WPL scheme is to tackle congestion by placing a charge upon the use of commuter workplace
parking places (WPPs). The parking places may have been free of charge to the employees for some time
previously. The aim is also to encourage employers to manage the number of free workplace parking
places that they provide, whilst promoting the use of sustainable transport. The introduction of a WPL has
other benefits associated with the reduction in the use of the car and increase in the use of alternative
modes such as walking, cycling and public transport e.g., improvements to health and the environment.

• The details of the potential WPL scheme requires further work but essentially workplaces with parking
places would face an annual charge per parking place and the employer would decide whether to pass
that compulsory charge onto the employee or not. The parking charges earned from the scheme provide
local authorities with a ring-fenced source of revenue to fund Local Transport Plan policies and objectives
(and the associated transport schemes such as improved bus services). Specifically, the Transport Act 2000
Road User Charging and Workplace Parking Levy Explanatory Note, states: “The Act enables local traffic
authorities outside London to introduce road user charging and workplace parking levies to help tackle
congestion and use the revenue to directly or indirectly facilitate local transport policy goals of the
licensing authority.”

1.2 Who will the proposal have the potential to affect?
☒ Bristol City Council workforce ☒ Service users ☒ The wider community
☐ Commissioned services ☒ City partners / Stakeholder organisations
Additional comments:

1.3 Will the proposal have an equality impact?
Could the proposal affect access levels of representation or participation in a service, or does it have the potential to
change e.g. quality of life: health, education, or standard of living etc.?
If ‘No’ explain why you are sure there will be no equality impact, then skip steps 2-4 and request review by Equality
and Inclusion Team.
If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment, or if you plan to complete the assessment at a later stage please state
this clearly here and request review by the Equality and Inclusion Team.

☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

The introduction of a WPL will have a range of impacts for different protected characteristic groups but the full
details of these impacts will not be clear until the necessary development work has been undertaken to
understand the size, scope and pricing strategy of the scheme. Therefore, this EQIA will need to be continuously
reviewed and updated as the project progresses. A final decision on any WPL scheme will need to be taken by
Committee at which point an updated EQIA will be provided.

Step 2: What information do we have?

2.1 What data or evidence is there which tells us who is, or could be affected?
Please use this section to demonstrate an understanding of who could be affected by the proposal. Include general
population data where appropriate, and information about people who will be affected with particular reference to
protected and other relevant characteristics: How we measure equality and diversity (bristol.gov.uk)
Use one row for each evidence source and say which characteristic(s) it relates to. You can include a mix of
qualitative and quantitative data e.g. from national or local research, available data or previous consultations and
engagement activities.
Outline whether there is any over or under representation of equality groups within relevant services - don't forget
to benchmark to the local population where appropriate. Links to available data and reports are here Data, statistics
and intelligence (sharepoint.com). See also: Bristol Open Data (Quality of Life, Census etc.); Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA); Ward Statistical Profiles.

For workforce / management of change proposals you will need to look at the diversity of the affected teams using
available evidence such as HR Analytics: Power BI Reports (sharepoint.com) which shows the diversity profile of
council teams and service areas. Identify any over or under-representation compared with Bristol economically
active citizens for different characteristics. Additional sources of useful workforce evidence include the Employee
Staff Survey Report and Stress Risk Assessment

Data / Evidence Source Summary of what this tells us
[Include a reference where known]

Bristol City Council WPL Feasibility Previous studies (Atkins 2011) have provided high level estimates of
Report (2011) the number of parking spaces that could be encompassed in a WPL
scheme based on different geographies. These range from a lower
estimate of 8,600 parking spaces for a smaller central zone to an
upper estimate of 57,000 for a scheme covering the entire city.
The WPL Feasibility Study (2021) notes that without undertaking a
more detailed audit of spaces the error bars on these estimates
remain high.

Bristol Quality of Life Survey 2023/24 67% of respondents think that air quality and traffic pollution is a
problem locally which suggests that there is majority support for
initiatives that seek to reduce the impacts of car use in the city.

74% of people think that traffic congestion is a problem locally which
suggests broad support for measures that reduce levels of traffic in
the city

36% of respondents state that they drive to work (2% car share)
which suggests – depending on the coverage of the WPL scheme –
that a significant number of people would be impacted by the
proposal.

A slightly higher percentage of people in the most deprived areas
(41.7%) and people between 50-65 drive to work (40.6%) than the
average. Disabled people (25.8%) and younger people between 16-24
(26.8%) are much less likely to drive to work.

% for whom lack of transport options
Quality of Life 2023-24 prevents them from leaving their home
Indicator: when they want to

Group Percentage
Bristol Average 22.4
10% most deprived 26.2
16 to 24 years 35.5
50 years and older 19.3
Disabled 33.1
Asian/Asian British 35.1
Black/Black British 19.8
Mixed/Multiple ethnic groups 30.7
Black, Asian and Minority
Ethnic 31.1
White Minority Ethnic 24.8
White British 20.6
Female 24.0
Male 20.5
LGB+ 34.3
Trans 36.4
Christian 20.9
Other religion 25.8
No religion or faith 22.4
Rented from housing
association 23.5
Rented from private landlord 27.3
Rented from the council 24.4
All carers 28.1
Single parents 22.7
No qualifications 23.5

Quality of Life 2023-24
Indicator: % who drive to work

Group Percentage
Bristol Average 36.7
10% most deprived 41.7
16 to 24 years 26.8
50 years and older 40.6
Disabled 25.8
Asian/Asian British 36.1
Black/Black British 32.8
Mixed/Multiple ethnic groups 29.0
Black, Asian and Minority
Ethnic 34.5
White Minority Ethnic 30.4
White British 38.3
Female 35.7
Male 38.0
LGB+ 28.2
Trans 11.9
Christian 44.4
Other religion 36.5
No religion or faith 32.6
Rented from housing
association 30.7
Rented from private landlord 26.8
Rented from the council 30.0
All carers 43.5
Single parents 50.5
No qualifications 30.8

NOMIS Bristol has approximately 18,395 businesses with a higher proportion
Nomis - Official Census and Labour of small (10 to 49 employees) and large (250+ employees) employers
Market Statistics (nomisweb.co.uk) than the regional average. More work is required to understand the
allocation of parking spaces across these businesses as it is likely that
many (particularly among micro and small businesses) will have no
allocated parking and therefore will not be impacted by the scheme.

Travel to Work Survey Bristol, March Bristol’s Travel to Work Survey results reveal that 31% of employees
2024 travel to work by car (with an additional 6% car sharing). On average
people driving to work travel in 3.2 days per week and travel an
average distance of 35 miles a day. The latter statistic demonstrates
that many commuters are travelling into Bristol from outside of the
local authority boundary and that the WPL will have impacts beyond
Bristol.
Note the following % splits don’t add up to 100% because of the
option ‘Prefer not to say’

The survey notes that there is a relatively equal split between men
(30%) and women (32%) who drive to work.

In line with the Quality of Life Survey the Travel to Work Survey
highlights that people 50+ (39%) are more likely to drive to work than
younger people under 30 (21%).

The survey identifies that people driving to work are more likely to be
from a white ethnic background (33%) than an ethnic minority group
(24%)

Unlike the Quality of Life Survey the Travel to Work Survey suggests
that an almost equal proportion of disabled (32%) and non-disabled
(31%) travel to work by car.

Bristol Walking and Cycling Index (2023) The Bristol Walking and Cycling Index polls a representative example
of Bristol’s population (circa 1,000 respondents). The survey reveals
data that would support the aims and objectives of a WPL scheme:

- 49% of people want to walk, wheel or cycle more
- 35% of people want to take public transport more
- 29% of people want to drive less

In addition to the report notes that 64% of people want more
investment in walking and wheeling, 58% more investment in cycling,
83% more investment in public transport and only 23% more
investment in driving.

Additional comments:

2.2 Do you currently monitor relevant activity by the following protected characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☐ Gender Reassignment
☐ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☐ Pregnancy/Maternity ☒ Race
☐ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☐ Sexual Orientation

2.3 Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
Where there are gaps in the evidence, or you don’t have enough information about some equality groups, include an
equality action to find out in section 4.2 below. This doesn’t mean that you can’t complete the assessment without
the information, but you need to follow up the action and if necessary, review the assessment later. If you are
unable to fill in the gaps, then state this clearly with a justification.
For workforce related proposals all relevant characteristics may not be included in HR diversity reporting (e.g.
pregnancy/maternity). For smaller teams diversity data may be redacted. A high proportion of not known/not
disclosed may require an action to address under-reporting.

While there a lot of relevant data exists on the commuting habits of Bristol’s residents the following gaps remain:

- Whether different groups currently pay for parking or are offered free parking at their workplace.
- An accurate picture of the number of employee parking bays that may form part of the scheme.
- The ability of employers and employees to meet additional costs.
2.4 How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
You will nearly always need to involve and consult with internal and external stakeholders during your assessment.
The extent of the engagement will depend on the nature of the proposal or change. This should usually include
individuals and groups representing different relevant protected characteristics. Please include details of any
completed engagement and consultation and how representative this had been of Bristol’s diverse communities.
Include the main findings of any engagement and consultation in Section 2.1 above.

If you are managing a workforce change process or restructure please refer to Managing a change process or
restructure (sharepoint.com) for advice on consulting with employees etc. Relevant stakeholders for engagement
about workforce changes may include e.g. staff-led groups and trades unions as well as affected staff.

Presently only a feasibility study has been undertaken in relation to the WPL scheme. Further engagement is
planned should committee approve the proposal to develop the business case further.

2.5 How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
Explain how you will continue to engage with stakeholders throughout the course of planning and delivery. Please
describe where more engagement and consultation is required and set out how you intend to undertake it. Include
any targeted work to seek the views of under-represented groups. If you do not intend to undertake it, please set
out your justification. You can ask the Equality and Inclusion Team for help in targeting particular groups.

The scheme has been subject to an initial feasibility study which outlines a stakeholder management strategy for
future stages of project development. This highlights the need for extensive public consultation as well as
delivering a communications plan which sets out how key stakeholders (e.g. employers) will be kept updated and
informed at key stages of the project. The next stage of development will advance the stakeholder strategy and
communication plan and any scheme will be subject to public consultation and committee sign off before delivery.

Step 3: Who might the proposal impact?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered above and the characteristics protected by the Equality Act 2010.
Also include details of existing issues for particular groups that you are aware of and are seeking to address or
mitigate through this proposal. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying potential impacts etc.
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com)

3.1 Does the proposal have any potentially adverse impacts on people based on their
protected or other relevant characteristics?
Consider sub-categories and how people with combined characteristics (e.g. young women) might have particular
needs or experience particular kinds of disadvantage.
Where mitigations indicate a follow-on action, include this in the ‘Action Plan’ Section 4.2 below.
GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many groups)

The WPL scheme is still at an early stage of development with key details such as pricing, scope and potential
exemptions not yet determined. As such this EQIA is proportional to the level of detail currently available.
The analysis of the data suggests there is high levels of support for measures that improve conditions for walking,
cycling and public transport and for securing more investment for these modes. Residents want to drive less and
walk, cycle, and use public transport more.

The scheme is likely to have an impact on a significant number of commuters who drive to work and of that group
it is not unreasonable to suggest that people on lower incomes will likely find it harder to meet additional costs if
their employer passes the cost of the WPL scheme on to them.

The analysis finds that older people make up a greater proportion of people who travel to work by car and
therefore they are more likely to be impacted by the scheme than other groups.

Whilst a levy would be for the employer not the employee there is a strong possibility that charges would be
passed on directly to employees or the overall number of car parking spaces reduced - so impacts below have
been assessed on that basis.

A previous scoping study identified that concessions could be made for specific groups, such as blue badge
holders, small businesses, and NHS facilities etc.

Analysis at this stage is limited to consideration of the direct impact of a levy on employees and has not
considered any potential additional pressure on on-street parking, as the levy would apply to the parking space
itself rather than the vehicle.

PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Younger people are less likely to be reliant on a car to get to work. The reduction in
congestion and re-investment of fees into improved public transport options will
provide a disproportionate benefit this group
Mitigations: None
Age: Older People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: This group is more likely to be drive to work and as such is likely to be
disproportionately impacted by the proposal if employers decide to pass on costs to
them. That said, the Quality-of-Life survey 2023/24 shows that the number of people
from the 50+ age group that state that they ‘find it difficult to manage financially’ is
much lower than the average.
Mitigations: None
Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: A WPL scheme could potentially have an adverse impact on Disabled employees who
need a car in order to maintain a quality of life and access to employment. A WPL could
also adversely impact a Disabled person who may need to incorporate other tasks into
their commute to work (trip chaining) such as attending necessary appointments in
order to maintain their health.

Mitigations: Consider exception for all Disabled Employees. Blue Badge scheme may offer partial
mitigations for those Disabled employees who have them, and some employers may
already have designated spaces for Disabled People.
Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Women are statistically more likely to hold caring responsibilities for children and older
adults and would therefore be disproportionately affected if they need to incorporate
other tasks into their commute to work (trip chaining) such as school run, caring for or
helping with tasks for older adults.

Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
employees with caring responsibilities.
Sexual orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Pregnancy / Maternity Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: As above re. caring responsibilities and trip chaining. Pregnant employees may be more
dependent on having their own transport for pre-natal appointments or if they find
public transport inaccessible.
Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
pregnant employees.
Gender reassignment Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic households in the UK are more likely to be in deep
poverty and experience higher levels of material deprivation. As such if employers pass
on WPL scheme costs to these groups they may find it harder to meet these additional
costs
Mitigations: No mitigation identified at this stage.
Religion or Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Belief
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☒
civil partnership
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS
Socio-Economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: The Quality-of-Life Survey suggests that people living in areas of deprivation are slightly
more likely to drive to work than the city average. If employers pass on WPL scheme
costs to these groups they may find it harder to meet these additional costs
Mitigations: See general comments above
Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: As above – those who hold caring responsibilities for children and older adults and
would therefore be disproportionately affected if they need to incorporate other tasks
into their commute to work (trip chaining)
Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
employees with caring responsibilities.
Other groups [Please add additional rows below to detail the impact for any other relevant groups as appropriate e.g.
asylum seekers and refugees; care experienced; homelessness; armed forces personnel and veterans]
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:

3.2 Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their protected or other
relevant characteristics?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our Public Sector Equality Duty to:
✓ Eliminate unlawful discrimination for a protected group
✓ Advance equality of opportunity between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t
✓ Foster good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t

How people move around the city is intrinsically linked to equality and inclusion. We know that many groups with
protected characteristics are more likely to suffer the negative impacts of car use – such as congestion, poor air
quality, traffic accidents and unhealthy physical environments, whilst at the same time having more limited access
and use of vehicles. In addition, we know that these groups are much more reliant on walking and public transport
as a means of accessing work, education, training, and services. (Transport and inequality: An evidence review for
the Department for Transport, NatCen, 2019).

This proposal is in line with the Bristol Transport Strategy that seeks to rebalance the transport system to ensure
that car use is priced fairly compared with walking, cycling and public transport. Cars take up a disproportionate
amount of space on public highway which limits the use of that space for more investment in sustainable modes
of transport (e.g. bike and bus lanes and wider pavements). By increasing the tariffs associated car ownership we
may be able to encourage people to re-evaluate the need to own a vehicle.

Step 4: Impact

4.1 How has the equality impact assessment informed or changed the proposal?
What are the main conclusions of this assessment? Use this section to provide an overview of your findings. This
summary can be included in decision pathway reports etc.
If you have identified any significant negative impacts which cannot be mitigated, provide a justification showing
how the proposal is proportionate, necessary, and appropriate despite this.
Summary of significant negative impacts and how they can be mitigated or justified:
Depending on how the scheme is designed the EQIA has highlighted that there are impacts on various groups that
need to be considered during the development of the business case. This includes potential disproportionate
impacts on Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic groups, older people (50+) and people in social deprivation.
Summary of positive impacts / opportunities to promote the Public Sector Equality Duty:
Depending on how the scheme is designed there are likely to be a number of benefits for different protected
characteristic groups who often negative impacts of car use – such as congestion, poor air quality, traffic accidents
and unhealthy physical environments, whilst at the same time having more limited access and use of vehicles.

4.2 Action Plan
Use this section to set out any actions you have identified to improve data, mitigate issues, or maximise
opportunities etc. If an action is to meet the needs of a particular protected group please specify this.
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale
To review and update the EQIA through the development of the Jacob Pryor 2024-2025
business case

4.3 How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
How will you know if you have been successful? Once the activity has been implemented this equality impact
assessment should be periodically reviewed to make sure your changes have been effective your approach is still
appropriate.
A monitoring and evaluation strategy will be developed for the WPL scheme as part of the proposed business
case.

Step 5: Review
The Equality and Inclusion Team need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your EqIA. EqIAs
should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers on the equalities
impact of the proposal. Please seek feedback and review from the Equality and Inclusion Team before requesting
sign off from your Director1.
Equality and Inclusion Team Review: Director Sign-Off: Alex Hearn, Director Economy of
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team Place

Date: 20/8/2024 Date: 22/08/2024

1 Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
