Bristol City Council
Minutes of the Transport and Connectivity
Policy Committee

12 September 2024 at 5.00 pm

Members Present:-
Councillors: Ed Plowden (Chair), Graham Morris (Vice-Chair), Donald Alexander, Rob Bryher,
Tim Rippington, Emma Edwards, Kaz Self, David Wilcox and Jos Clark

1 Welcome, Introductions and Safety Information

The Chair welcomed all attendees to the meeting and explained the emergency evacuation procedure.

The Chair asked the Committee members to introduce themselves.

2 Apologies for Absence and Substitutions

Apologies were received from Councillor Coombes. Councillor Jos Clark attended as substitute.

3 Declarations of Interest

There were none.

4 Minutes of the Previous Meeting

The minutes of the previous meeting were agreed as accurate.

5 Chair's Announcements

There were none.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

6 Public Forum

The Committee noted that the following Public Forum had been received.

Public Forum Questions:

Question 1 - Nigel Bryant - Noise Levels on Anchor Road
Question 2 A,B - Chris Whitfield - EV Charging for terraced homes
Question 3 - Steve Duddell - Cheltenham Road/A38 resurfacing
Questions 4 & 5 A,B,C - David Redgewell, South West Transport Network and Railfuture Severnside - Bus
Services
Questions 6, 7 & 8 - Ian Pond, Bristol Cycling Campaign Bristol Cycleways
Question 9, 10 & 11 - Matt Saunders - Bus Gates
Question 12 - Cllr Shona Jemphrey - East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood Trial
Questions 13 & 14 - Ian Beckey - Living Easton and Railfuture Severnside & Rosa Kell
- Public Transport

Those who attended the meeting asked supplementary questions and received the following information
in response:

Chris Whitfield - EV Charging for terraced homes
Officers confirmed that the current policy not to permit gully systems was due to the potential risk of
potentially unsafe electrical cables and wiring on the highways and pavements as well as the potential trip
hazard. Solutions continued to be sought and officers were looking at best practice and trials in other
areas. A timeframe for any change to the current policy was not known.

David Redgewell, South West Transport Network and Railfuture Severnside - Bus Services
Officers confirmed that engagement and conversations with WECA continued to take place. In response
to the report that some service information at bus stops did not represent latest service changes, the
Chair agreed to raise this point with the relevant officers at WECA.

Ian Pond, Bristol Cycling Campaign Bristol Cycleways
Officers confirmed that discussions take place with developers to discuss available options within the
agreed planning permission. The authority had a responsibility to maintain structures in perpetuity and
needed to remain pragmatic about long term maintenance responsibilities.

Matt Saunders - Bus Gates

Officers confirmed that signage was in accordance with the regulations. In some circumstances changes
would be considered in response to concerns raised such as increased lighting to improve visibility. An
additional sign had been erected on Gas Ferry Road with another to be installed on 23 September.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

With reference to reminder letters sent regarding fines imposed, officers clarified that these non
statutory letters were part of the ethical debt recovery process to encourage drivers to pay within the
initial payment period and avoid increased fines. Letters had been sent a week too early in some cases
which had now been rectified.

The Executive Director and Chair proposed a ‘lessons learnt’ approach to the bus gates roll out to inform
future projects and ensure clear information and messages to members of the public.

Public Forum Statements:

Statements were received as follows:

01 David Redgewell
02 Ian Pond, Bristol Cycling Campaign
03 Councillor Mark Weston
04 Nicolas Davies
05 Sue Maggs
06 Councillor John Goulandris
07 Julie Levers
08 Steve Smith
09 Catherine Farrington
10 Dr Philippa A Nason
11 Wilma Gough
12 Sue Callanan
13 Christine O'Donnell
14 Lydia Sheehan
15 Angela Norris
16 Sarah-Jane Liddington
17 E M Stagg
18 Heather Andrews
19 Jo Rackham
20 Rev S D Williams
21 Jill Kempshall
22 Fiona Perry
23 Amanda Sherwood
24 Barbara Bush
25 Andrew Smith
26 Barry and Lynne Pentlow
27 Dr Sharon Lloyd
28 Patricia Smith
29 Paul Harvey
30 Mary Rivers
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

31 Frances Riley
32 Councillor Gooch car
33 Krystyna Brown
34 Sally Green
35 Revd Andre Hart
36 Dr Neil Matthews
37 Deirdre Oaten
38 Alan Taylor
39 Dr Aliesje Kuur
40 Felicity Thomas
41 Graham Craven
43 Natasha Keyser
44 Sylvia Windows
45 G Nason
46 Brian Watson
47 Janet Taylor
48 Andrea Thomas
49 Councillor Shona Jemphrey
50 Kate Taylor
51 Caroline Durston-Smith
52 John Curran
53 Matt Sanders
54 Nikki Press
55 Martin Rands
56 Diana Hawley
57 Andrew Renshaw
58 Jo Seargant
59 Gina Eastman
60 Geoff Gollop
61 Abigail Rossini
62 Hilary Long
63 Sue Boyd
64 Cllr Yassin Mohamud
65 Nicholas and Luba
66 Helen Johnson
67 Councillor Ani Stafford-Townsend

Further statements were received and noted from Brendan Murphy of BARBI/Save Bristol Nightlife and
Kathryn Davis of Visit West.

The Committee noted the public forum with relevant content taken into account as part of the
consideration of the relevant agenda items.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

7 Opportunities to promote sustainable transport through a review of parking policies
and charges

The Committee considered a report that sought approval for a range of initiatives to further improve air
quality and make more efficient use of on and off street, public car parking spaces, whist considering the
management of spaces to help driver behaviour change towards sustainable modes of travel.

The Head of Highways outlined the report to Members and it was confirmed that each recommendation
would be considered in turn.

Recommendation 1 – Need for a Parking and Kerbside Strategy.

A Task and Finish Group had been proposed to develop a Parking and Kerbside Strategy. The strategy
would cover issues on the road and pavement including how to use streetspace and make space healthy
and accessible. It was proposed that the Task and Finish Group be chaired by Councillor Rob Bryher.

The recommendation was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Edwards. On being
put to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously.

1. It was APPROVED that a Task and Finish Group be initiated to be chaired by Cllr Rob Bryher, to
make recommendations to the committee for a modern and holistic Parking and Kerbside Strategy.

Recommendation 2 – Residents Parking Scheme (RPS) – First Permit increase and realignment of Easton &
St Philips RPS alongside First Permit increase.

Councillors requested consideration of how to mitigate the impact of RPS on surrounding areas, plans for
reviews and implementation of RPS in new areas. This was suggested as a topic for above Task & Finish
Group.

It was confirmed that the first car permit covered costs with any excess of income from subsequent car
permits then ringfenced to the transport budget.

It was clarified that the decision had been approved by the previous administration but the
implementation delayed and it was not a part of the implemented 2024/25 budget. The decision had
returned to Policy Committee for further consideration.

Recommendation 2A was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Morris. On being put
to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED (6 members voting in favour, none against with 3
abstentions)

It was APPROVED
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

2a. Residents Parking - Approve and implement increase of £56 to £124 for first vehicle permit tariffs.

Recommendation 2B was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Wilcox. On being put
to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously.

It was APPROVED
2b. Residents Parking - Approved all RPS permit types going forward are included within the Council’s
Fees and Charges so that an inflationary increase is made every year (rounded to the nearest whole
numbers).

Recommendation 2C was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Edwards.

Councillor Wilcox moved an amendment to the report as follows:

c. Approve and implement price alignment for all Easton (ES) RPS permits with the prevailing rates for
other RPS over a two year period to remove the pricing anomaly, noting that the budget implications for
this increase are negligible. Subject to further financial and equalities assessment delegated to officers in
consultation with the Chair

The amendment was seconded by Councillor Bryher

Councillor Wilcox highlighted that the ward of Easton was one of the most deprived areas of the city and
the amendment effectively extended the time taken to increase the rate for that RPS area.

On being put to the vote the amendment was CARRIED (5 members voting in favour and 1 against. There
were 3 abstentions)

A vote was then held for Recommendation 2C as amended. On being put to the vote the
recommendation was CARRIED unanimously.

It was APPROVED
c. Residents Parking - Approve and implement price alignment for all Easton (ES) RPS permits with the
prevailing rates for other RPS over a two year period to remove the pricing anomaly, noting that
the budget implications for this increase are negligible. Subject to further financial and equalities
assessment delegated to officers in consultation with the Chair

Recommendation 3 – RPS Business, Customer, Medical and Trader Permits and Visitor Permits

Recommendation 3A was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Bryher. On being put
to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously.

It was APPROVED
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

3a. RPS Business, Customer, Medical & Trader Permits and Visitor Permits - Approved a rounded 22%
inflationary increase to medical, trader, business & customer permits.

Recommendation 3B was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Bryher. On being put
to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously.

It was APPROVED
3b. RPS Business, Customer, Medical & Trader Permits and Visitor Permits - Approved introducing a
charge for all Visitor Permits (excluding Essential Visitor Permits for care needs). That charge to be
aligned with the prevailing hourly Pay and Display Rate and remove the additional allowance per
household.

Recommendation 4 - RPS Pay and Display changes and removal of 30minutes Free parking in the RPS

Recommendation 4A was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Morris. On being put
to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously.

It was APPROVED:
4a. RPS Pay and Display changes - Approved a rounded 22% inflationary increase to RPS Pay and
Display rate to £2 per hour.

Recommendation 4B was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Bryher. On being put
to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED (8 members voting in favour, 0 against with 1 abstention.

It was APPROVED:
4b. RPS Pay and Display changes - Approved the principle of an additional uplift to Pay and Display
rates in specified RPS areas to reflect demand and encourage turnover of spaces, and its
application in Clifton Village RPS, Kingsdown RPS & Clifton East RPS.

Recommendation 4C was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Bryher.

“Recommendation 4c
Approves the removal of the 30-minute free parking tariff in all RPS.”

Councillors asked for further work to find if there was another option available to close the loophole and
stop abuse of the system.

On being put to the vote the recommendation was LOST (4 members voting in favour, 5 against).

Recommendation 5 - District Car Park Charging

The recommendation was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Bryher.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

“Recommendation 5.
Approves implementation of charging at the District Car Parks as soon as possible”

Councillor Clark moved an amendment to the report as follows:

Approve implementation of charging at the District Car Parks as soon as possible, subject to free parking
being available at the following sites:

Westbury hill - 90 minutes free parking
Repton road - 60 minutes free parking
Callington Road/West Town Lane - 60 minutes free parking.

Subject to further financial and equalities assessment delegated to officers in consultation with the Chair

The amendment was seconded by Councillor Morris.

Councillor Clark highlighted that people who may not be able to use public transport would be
disadvantaged by not having somewhere to park to visit their local shops and the local area. That could
either result in parking on surrounding streets or pushing customers to larger supermarkets with car
parking.

Officers confirmed that the proposal had been approved within the 2023/24 budget passed by Full
Council although implementation had been delayed for 1 year. Not passing the recommendation
presented would impact the transport budget creating a deficit.

On being put to the vote the amendment was LOST (2 members voting in favour and 7 against)

On being put to the vote the recommendation was LOST (4 members voting in favour and 5 against)

Officers agreed to return to the Policy Committee with proposals for how to balance the budget in other
ways to be considered by the Policy Committee.

Recommendation 6 - Temple Gate & West End Multi Storey Car Parks

The recommendation was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Morris. On being
put to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously.

It was APPROVED:
6. Approved the implementation of competitive early bird charging at Temple Gate and West End
MSCPs and monitoring of the impacts.

Recommendation 7 - Linear Pricing
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

The recommendation was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Bryher.

There was some concern regarding the impact of the proposals for Linear Pricing on the nighttime
economy and safety of women, particularly when considering the last bus times for park and ride
services.

It was suggested that more work is needed and it could be added to the discussion points of the
Supported Bus Services T&F Group and Parking and Kerbside Strategy.

Councillor Rippington moved an amendment to the report as follows;

7. Implement an inflation-based charge only. Refer consideration of a change to linear charging to the
Parking Strategy Task and Finish Group, reporting back to the committee in 2025. Subject to further
financial and equalities assessment delegated to officers in consultation with the Chair.

The amendment was seconded by Councillor Alexander. On being put to the vote the amendment was
CARRIED (7 members voting in favour, 0 against with 2 abstentions)

The recommendation as amended was the put to a vote and was CARRIED unanimously.

It was APPROVED:
7. Implement an inflation-based charge only. Refer consideration of a change to linear charging to the
Parking Strategy Task and Finish Group, reporting back to the committee in 2025. Subject to
further financial and equalities assessment delegated to officers in consultation with the Chair.

Recommendation 8 – Delegated Authority for implementation

The recommendation was moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Bryher. On being
put to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously.

It was APPROVED:
8. Delegates authority to the Executive Director, Growth and Regeneration to implement the
approved proposals.

SUMMARY OF APPROVED RECOMMENDATIONS
The Policy Committee RESOLVED:
1. Initiated a Task and Finish Group, to be chaired by Cllr Rob Bryher, to make recommendations to
the committee for a modern and holistic Parking and Kerbside Strategy.

2. Residents Parking
a. Approve and implement increase of £56 to £124 for first vehicle permit tariffs.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

b. Approved all RPS permit types going forward are included within the Council’s Fees and Charges
so that an inflationary increase is made every year (rounded to the nearest whole numbers).
c. Approve and implement price alignment for all Easton (ES) RPS permits with the prevailing rates
for other RPS over a two year period to remove the pricing anomaly, noting that the budget
implications for this increase are negligible. Subject to further financial and equalities
assessment delegated to officers in consultation with the Chair

3. RPS Business, Customer, Medical & Trader Permits and Visitor Permits
a. Approved a rounded 22% inflationary increase to medical, trader, business & customer permits.
b. Approved introducing a charge for all Visitor Permits (excluding Essential Visitor Permits for care
needs). That charge to be aligned with the prevailing hourly Pay and Display Rate and remove
the additional allowance per household.

4. RPS Pay and Display changes and removal of 30m free parking in the RPS (New Proposals)
a. Approved a rounded 22% inflationary increase to RPS Pay and Display rate to £2 per hour.
b. Approved the principle of an additional uplift to Pay and Display rates in specified RPS areas to
reflect demand and encourage turnover of spaces, and its application in Clifton Village RPS,
Kingsdown RPS & Clifton East RPS.

6. Approved the implementation of competitive early bird charging at Temple Gate and West End
MSCPs and monitoring of the impacts.

7. Implement an inflation-based charge only. Refer consideration of a change to linear charging to
the Parking Strategy Task and Finish Group, reporting back to the committee in 2025. Subject to
further financial and equalities assessment delegated to officers in consultation with the Chair.

8. Delegates authority to the Executive Director, Growth and Regeneration to implement the
approved proposals.

* Recommendations 4c and 5 were not approved.

8 Supported Bus Services Priorities Task and Finish Group

The Committee considered a report that presented the proposal to establish a member Task and Finish
Group for Supported Bus Services.

The Head of City Transport presented the report which outlined proposals. It was planned that the Policy
Committee receive a report to it’s meeting in December for approval of the Task and Finish Group
conclusions and recommendations for the procurement of services and confirmation of the delegated
decision pathway.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

The report and recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor
Rippington. On being put to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously.

It was APPROVED:

1. That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity notes the report and further details supplied
in Appendix A and approves the recommended approach and Terms of Reference for the
Supported Bus Services Task and Finish Group.

2. That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity agree the appropriate decision makers for the
delegated decision on which services to fund when tenders are returned so that this can be
included in the committee decision paper.

3. That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity agree the frequency and duration of meetings
to inform the Terms of Reference

9 Bristol Regional Cycling Hub, Lawrence Weston

The Committee considered a report which appraised the Committee of the proposed Bristol Regional
Cycling Hub (BRCH) in Lawrence Weston and sought approval for expenditure to develop the business
case and submit a full planning application.

The Head of City Transport outlined the report and confirmed that the Full Business Case would return to
the Policy Committee following planning application presenting a further opportunity to consider the
scheme. A timeframe had been established to meet the 2027 deadline for CRSTS funding.

Councillors highlighted the importance of the facility and services it would bring to the city however,
there was concern about the loss of the current facilities from South Bristol. The current cycle centre in
BS14 had demonstrated the value of the model and Councillors hoped that some facility could be
retained in South Bristol so that there was not a complete loss of service.

The report and recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor
Alexander. On being put to the vote the recommendation was CARRIED unanimously.

It was APPROVED;
That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:

1. Approved the proposed approach in relation to delivery of the Bristol Regional Cycling Hub
(BRCH) as outlined in this report. The proposed approach will require the Committee to be
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

updated upon completion of the Outline Business Case, but the Full Business Case will require
Committee approval.

2. Authorised the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of
the Transport and Connectivity Committee, to take all steps required to proceed with the
development of the Outline Business Case and Full Business Case, and submission of the
planning application.

3. Authorised the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the Chair of
the Transport and Connectivity Committee, to take all steps required to bid for, accept, and
spend CRSTS funding (inclusive of the recently awarded funding of £813k) for procuring and
awarding contracts for development and delivery of the project, which may be over the key
decision threshold.

4. The above recommendations will apply to other funding opportunities that may arise during
the project’s life cycle, but the Committee will be updated on any such funding opportunity.

10 Workplace Parking Levy

The Committee considered a report which set out the current considerations surrounding how a
Workplace Parking Levy would work and what it would need to deliver it, seeking approval to allocate
funding for development of the business case for the scheme.

The Head of City Transport outlined the report to Members and confirmed to the Committee that as
proposals progress, further reports and information would return to be discussed and considered.

The Committee highlighted the following points:
- Further consideration was requested on the proposed cut off number for the number of spaces.
- It was important to speak to businesses and be able to demonstrate the benefits of the
scheme.
- If progressed, it would be important to show the benefits quickly so that residents, employees
and businesses can see where the funds are going.
- It was suggested that the Policy Committee could help shape an investment plan to outline
where money could be spent on transport improvements. For example, to ringfence for
improvements to the area of the WPL.

Officers confirmed that there was a legal requirement for the scheme to set out the projected money
raised and proposed spend in detail.

Nottingham was highlighted as a good case study with excellent public transport. If appropriate the
Committee could visit to find out more.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

The report and recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor
Wilcox.

Councillor Self moved an amendment which was seconded by Tim Rippington. The amendment text as
follows:

Where *Stage One: Scheme Development and Outline Business Case (OBC)” means;

Stage One (A) Scheme Feasibility. Identify the revenue opportunities of implementing a WPL by identifying
who would be charged, how much they would be charged and how much income would be raised as a
result. Identify potential implementation and ongoing costs. (NCC Appendix C WS1.1 – WS1.3)

Stage One (B) Scheme design and finalisation of Outline Business Case (OBC) – detailed scheme design
including locations, exemptions etc. (NCC Appendix C WS1.4-WS1.5)

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity

1. In order to ensure money is not spent unnecessarily, the Stage One* process as recommended by
NCC would be split into two parts, with a committee review after Part One to confirm whether to
proceed.
2. Approve, subject to suitable resource being available, so as not to delay the implementation of
the CRSTS programme or other key transport programmes, the progression to Stage One (A)
Development at a cost of up to £500K. Approve testing options for a WPL and the potential
benefits and issues those options would create to enable a more informed decision to be taken as
to whether to proceed to Stage One (B) and then to FBC and potential subsequent delivery of a
WPL.

* with subsequent paragraphs renumbered.

In response to the amendment, officers confirmed that to add a formal report for decision at ‘stage two’
would introduce further step to the process which would likely increase the timeframe by two months in
order to proceed through the decision pathway to the Policy Committee. There would also be an
associated resource implication.

As an alternative course of action, it was suggested that stages of the process in line with project
workstreams and within the proposed report recommendations could be reflected on the Forward Plan of
the Policy Committee

In response to the amendment, the Chair and officers gave assurance that the project would be
monitored closely with updates provided to the Committee and clear checks and balances. It was also
clarified that there would be points in the process where it would be appropriate to review and stop the
process if necessary.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

The amendment was withdrawn on the above assurances.

On the recommendation being put to the vote, the recommendation within the report was CARRIED (8
voting FOR, 1 against).

It was APPROVED;
That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity

3. Approved, subject to suitable resource being available, so as not to delay the implementation
of the CRSTS programme or other key transport programmes, the progression to Stage One
Development and Outline Business Case (OBC) at a cost of up to £1m. Approve testing options
for a WPL and the potential benefits and issues those options would create to enable a more
informed decision to be taken as to whether to proceed to FBC and potential subsequent
delivery of a WPL.
4. Stage One Development and OBC costs to be funded through CAZ funding to be repaid from
subsequent income generated from the scheme.

Contractual:

5. Authorised the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration in consultation with Committee
Chair for Transport and Connectivity to procure/extend/vary and award the contract(s)
necessary for the implementation of Stage 1 of the WPL, in-line with the procurement routes
and maximum budget envelopes outlined in this report, noting the associated Legal
commentaries.
6. Authorised the Exec Director for Growth and Regeneration to invoke any subsequent
extensions/variations specifically defined in the contract(s) being awarded, up to the maximum
budget envelope outlined in this report.

11 2024/25 P3 Finance Forecast Report - Transport & Connectivity

The Committee considered a report that presented the Transport financial forecast at period 3 2024-
2025.

Officers confirmed that with many programmes grant funded and working to differing timelines there
may be some delay in the reporting capital programmes. Officers were working to improve the related
forecasts.

The Transport and Connectivity Committee noted the report.
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

12 Q1 2024/25 Corporate Risk Report - Transport and Connectivity

The Committee considered a report that provided an update on the current significant strategic risks to
achieving the Council’s objectives, within the Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee remit, as set in
the Corporate Strategy 2022-27 and summarised the progress in managing the risks and actions being
taken as at Quarter 1 2024-2025.

The risk of the multiple interventions and delivery of projects across the City for the timebound CRSTS
funding was highlighted, as the grant needed to be fully invested by March 2027. Officers assured
Councillors that BCC and WECA had focus on the management of that risk with additional resource
allocated to the coordination and mitigation within programming, especially within the City Centre.
Officers welcomed a future discussion on this topic.

The complex coordination of capital delivery was highlighted with the example of the unpredictable and
complex situation by way of the bridges and highways within the City. It was suggested that officers
revisit that risk in order to inform the Committee.

With reference to CRR43 – how a lack of progress for Mass Transit may have on Impact on the city, it was
noted that the project had been renamed ‘West Rapid Transport’.

The impact on residents where projects from CIL funding had not been delivered was highlighted as a
risk. Councillors requested data on how much funding had been allocated to projects and how and when
they may be delivered. Officers confirmed the recruitment to two posts tasked with progressing the
implementation of projects and officers would provide that information to the Councillors.

It was RESOLVED that the Committee noted the contents of report on the P3 forecast for the Transport
and Connectivity Committee.

Meeting ended at 8.10 pm

CHAIR __________________
