Statements to the 05 June 2026 Joint meeting - West of England
Combined Authority Committee and West of England Joint Committee

Statement 1 – Sarah Freeman

WECA Strategic Green Belt Assessment

I wanted to contact you regarding the above and in particular:

Table 4.1: Ratings for strategic contribution to the Green Belt purposes (P47)

The assessment of the area P47 had two significant ratings. This land has recently been
granted a planning in principle (PIP) permission by South Gloucestershire Council, ref:
P26/00465/PIP.

What I am concerned about is the fact that considering WECA said this land played a
significant contribution to the Green belt, stating the A4175 was noted as marking a
clear separation between urban and rural areas the Council has deemed otherwise.

They state on in their report Page 101 para 5.12:

The WECA SGBA records P47 as making a ‘significant contribution’ to this purpose as
the parcel lies directly adjacent to the Willsbridge suburbs of the large built-up area or
Bristol and South Gloucestershire, and forms part of the separation between the urban
area and the inset village of Bitton. The A4175 is noted as marking a clear separation
between the urban area and the rural area beyond. Whilst noting this, it must be
considered that P47 is a much larger parcel than the application site itself, which is only
0.49ha and is directly adjoined to the A4175. It is therefore reasonable to conclude that
the contribution can be reduced, given that the site only forms a very small part of the
overall P47.

I disagree with what they state. Just because it is a small site does not mean it is less
important, it is part of a larger site. They are setting a precedent and ignoring the WECA
SGBA allowing developers to exploit the Green Belt in the future using this case as a
reference.

Conclusion

I am concerned the council are ignoring the WECA Green belt assessment and allowing
developers to build on Green Belt land that has been deemed “significant” by WECA.

If WECA could assist with this issue, or look into this matter I would be grateful.
Statement 2 – Gemma Skuse

I am submitting this statement to draw urgent committee attention to the systematic
dismissal of community feedback and local representation regarding the installation of
12-hour bus lanes on the A37 Wells Road. For the past six years, the residents of the
Stockwood ward have stood firmly and consistently opposed to these changes.

The Transport Committee's decision to approve these measures completely ignores the
reality of the transport network in this area and represents a clear prioritisation of
political ideology over practical common sense.

My local ward councillors, Cllr Morris and Cllr Hucker, have worked tirelessly and
engaged fully in every stage of this process to make the Transport Committee see
sense, yet their interventions on behalf of their constituents have been entirely ignored.

The major flaws of this scheme, which have been persistently overlooked, are:

• An Unnecessary and Unjustified Scheme: The implementation of 12-hour bus
lanes on this specific section of the A37 Wells Road is visually detached from
real demand. Exceptionally few bus services use this route, they operate on a
limited 30-minute schedule, and they are long-distance services arriving from
Wells, Street, and Bath. Furthermore, while this project is framed as an
improvement to the No. 2 bus service, the No. 2 service does not even utilise this
section of the Wells Road south of West Town Lane.
• Severe Side-Street Congestion: Forcing general traffic out of a main arterial
lane will cause immediate rat-running. The side streets that will bear the brunt of
this bottleneck include Mowbray Road, Hazelbury Road, Imperial Road, Beryl
Grove, Whitecross Avenue, Woodleigh Gardens, and Davids Road.
• Increased Residential Pollution: Standing traffic queues on the A37 will force
idling cars onto narrow, domestic residential side roads as drivers search for
alternative routes, drastically lowering local air quality.
• Massive Displaced Parking: The removal of spaces will cause immense
logistical stress to residential roads as in the weekdays these are cars from the
staff of Highcroft Vets, Petherton Road Resource Centre and Bernash Care
Home, none of which provide off street parking for their staff yet are big
employers of the local area.
The data proves that public consultation has been treated as a box-ticking exercise
rather than a democratic process. In the 2020 consultation, 43.1% of respondents
explicitly rejected the bus lanes. In the secondary 2024 consultation, an overwhelming
98% of local residents objected to the proposals. Despite this near-unanimous
rejection, the plans were pushed through and approved anyway in July 2025.
The Metro Mayor and the Combined Authority are funding this project. Without WECA
public funds, Bristol City Council would lack the infrastructure capability to execute it.
This is public taxpayer money being spent in the most catastrophic of ways. In a
functional democracy, public money must be spent in accordance with the clear,
explicit will of the community.

I ask the Committee to do the right thing and immediately freeze the funding allocation
for the A37 bus lane phase due to it being unjustified and unnecessary.

Statement 3 – Lewis Faith

Dear committee I am resident of ([address redacted by Democratic Services]) Which is
situated a short distance south of the Brislington Park & Ride bus station.

It is my experience that the Bath Road is a serious traffic bottleneck from Hicks Gate
Roundabout all the way to central Bristol. A bus journey can often take over 40 minutes
for what would be a 5 minute journey on clear roads. The amount of traffic appears to
be getting more severe year by year, no doubt encouraged by already completed
housing projects along the Bath Road, with 2 more large projects currently being
constructed.

The congestion problem is no secret and indeed there is a separate plan to apparently
improve the Bath road. Current proposals to improve the Bath Road in Bristol are being
approached in sections, with focus often being on adding cycle lanes. There appears to
be no general continuity between proposals for large scale development directly to the
sides of Bath Road and development of the Bath Road. Nor are other developments
such as Brislington Meadows being accounted for. This lack of general assessment
appears to leading towards a future where traveling into Bristol from the South will be a
miserable and slow experience, leading to increased pollution and lost business hours.
If Bristol is to remain a popular regional hub, people must be able to travel to and from it
without frustration and loss of time.

Residential planning applications proposed in the area of Hicks Gate Roundabout have
rightly met serious criticism from Highways because of the lack of capacity along the
Bath Road.

If Bristol is actually going to thrive in the long term rather than being a place to be
exploited in the medium term, there needs to be a plan that rigorously takes into
account the affects of all large scale developments in and around the city. Nothing I
currently see gives me any hope that these disparate plans will actually function
together properly. I see a council chasing it’s tail, and developers chasing a dizzied
council, it’s chaos.
Until serious work is done to dramatically alter the transport infrastructure around
Bristol, developments such as those proposed around Hicks Gate Roundabout should
not be seriously considered. They should only exist as potential sites that transport
development work can take into account, and when transport development work is
clearly and unambiguously set to improve capacity - should residential development of
this scale be given any seal of approval.

Based on the obvious detrimental economic and environmental impacts it would be
irresponsible at this stage to do anything that would add weight to the approval of
detailed plans for residential development at Hicks Gate Roundabout.

I am not opposed to these sites being developed, but this should only happen when
blissful ignorance does not lead decision making.

Statement 4 – Andy Gibbons

I write on behalf of the residents of ((address redacted))— a Grade II listed historic
estate — to formally submit our consultation statement ahead of the WECA committee
meeting.

We do not object in principle to meeting regional housing needs. However, the current
masterplan, as proposed, risks causing severe and irreversible harm to a designated
heritage asset and its setting. We call upon WECA and the appointed developers to
demonstrate, through binding planning conditions, that the following three material
considerations will be fully and robustly addressed.

1. TRAFFIC, NOISE, AND AIR QUALITY ON THE A4 CORRIDOR

The A4 Bath Road frontage of ([address redacted by Democratic Services]) already
suffers from high traffic volumes, significant ambient noise, and persistent air pollution.
Adding upwards of 1,000 dwellings and a major transport interchange will materially
worsen conditions at a site that deserves statutory protection under Section 66 of the
Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990.

We require the masterplan to mandate: retention and substantive enhancement of the
existing mature tree screening along the A4; physical traffic-calming measures
including average-speed enforcement; and acoustic barriers proportionate to the
increased arterial road noise generated by this development.

2. PROTECTION OF STRATEGIC SIGHT LINES TO KELSTON HILL

The elevated, landscaped grounds of [Address redacted by Democratic Services]
command panoramic views eastward across the Green Belt toward Kelston Hill. These
sight lines are integral to the historic character and designed landscape of Brislington
House and must be treated as a non-negotiable heritage consideration.

We require: strict height restrictions on all development plots falling within the eastern
viewshed; a comprehensive Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment (LVIA) that
explicitly tests views from the upper floors and terrace of [address redacted by
Democratic Services]; and a stepped building profile ensuring new rooftops remain
entirely below our established sight lines.

3. WILDLIFE CORRIDORS AND BIODIVERSITY NET GAIN

The mature gardens and woodland of [address redacted by Democratic Services]
support rich biodiversity, including tawny owls, greater spotted woodpeckers,
nuthatches, greenfinches, foxes, and many other species - populations already under
pressure from incremental development across the wider area. As proposed, the
masterplan would effectively isolate these grounds as an ecological island.

We require a minimum 20% Biodiversity Net Gain delivered through wide, continuous,
and legally protected wildlife corridors connecting the estate westward to Brislington
Meadows and southward across the A4 to Stockwood Open Space. Isolated grass
amenity strips are not an acceptable substitute.

CONCLUSION

[Address redacted by Democratic Services] is a landscape-led heritage asset of
regional significance. This consultation represents the last meaningful opportunity to
embed robust safeguards into the masterplanning framework before irreversible
decisions are made. We respectfully request that this statement be placed before the
committee in full, and that we are formally notified of all subsequent Environmental
Impact Assessment stages and committee hearing dates.

Statement 5 – Margeret Luton

I was heartened to hear Cllr Ed Plowden, when he was interviewed on Radio Bristol
Breakfast Show a few weeks ago, when he stated that "he always listened to concerns
raised" (admittedly this statement was made in connection with Bedminster) but he
certainly has not listened to concerns of residents in connection with the Wells Road
Bus Gate! The question I ask is - how can you pick and choose what concerns you listen
to?

I am aghast to learn that the bus lanes (which we do not need!) are narrower than the
absolute minimum width recommended by the Department of Transport.

These narrower bus lanes are to be shared with cyclists......
The question I would like to ask - is the Department of Transport aware of this and, if so,
have they given written permission for the narrower bus lanes to be installed with the
inherent danger going forward.

If it has been approved by DoT, perhaps a copy of the letter saying "yes" should be made
public!

As a resident of Mowbray Road, we now have an idea of what the future holds for us
with the installation of the UNNECESSARY bus lanes.

We have had to endure traffic chaos since the road works commenced at West Town
Lane/Sturminster Road with traffic lights that came, went and came back again and
again.

Then there was the addition of the temporary traffic lights at the junction of Wells
Road/Staunton Lane which has made our road and adjoining roads to become
"permanent" rat runs. We have a 20mph speed limit but, believe it or not, this is not
adhered to!!

Presumably the "people in so called charge of the City" are aware there is a children's
playground/open space in Mowbray Road - what you are proposing is an accident
waiting to happen - who will accept responsibility, Cllr Ed Plowden? I think not.

At the end of the day, these bus lanes are NOT needed as only two buses per hour (172
and 376 to and from Wells/Street/Bath) use the Wells Road and they are cancelled
quite frequently.............the No 2 bus does NOT and will NOT use the proposed bus
lanes! Once again, WHY do we need bus lanes?

Your share of the £540m - to be "spent" by March 2027 - could be used to resurface our
roads/fill in potholes which will certainly enhance and provide sustainable transport
which is what the money is supposed to be used for.

I would like to record my thanks to Cllr Morris and Cllr Hucker for their tireless work,
over a long period of time, to try to get this idiotic idea overturned.

Hopefully I will hear from someone after your meeting on Friday, 5th June.

Statement 6 – Melissa Blackburn

I am writing to you as the CEO of Lockleaze Neighbourhood Trust, the Community Hub
for Lockleaze in North Bristol. You will know that Lockleaze is a community of 14,000
people stretching from Filton Avenue up to Cheswick Village and down to IKEA. We are
a resilient community with some challenges around health, housing and hardship and
sadly, around transport - particularly our local bus service.
I am writing to ask in the strongest terms and on behalf of our community, why the 73
bus service has been withdrawn from Lockleaze.

You will have received similar concerns from David Wilcox our Local Councillor, and
our MP Damian Egan will have also written to you.

At the top and middle of Lockleaze, the only bus services we have are the 24, 72 and the
73 - we have very few services as it is. The removal of the 73 means that it is now very
difficult to get a direct bus into the centre of Bristol. I would suggest the withdrawal of
this bus service is serious loss to our community and will contribute to community
isolation and hardship. This is a serious concern for us as the community anchor
organisation.

My understanding is there were three issues affecting this service:

• Usage - We know this service is well used, as the bus stop is right by our
Community Hub building. This service is the only direct service into town via
Broadmead as the 72 goes round the houses via Cotham. Local people need
direct routes into the centre for work and play. My understanding is that this was
seen as an underused service, but I would politely suggest you re-survey.
• Scheduling - Ask anyone in Lockleaze and they will tell you that the 72 and 73
bus often arrive within minutes of each other, with another hour to wait before
the next service. Sorting out the scheduling issue would ideally have been
addressed before cancelling the service.
• Consultation - We did not get a heads up about the transport survey that WECA
did recently. It is really important that the community have their say in Lockleaze
as I believe they would not support the cutting of our bus services.

Please urgently address this serious issue and please request an answer from WECA
Transport and First Bus. We expect this bus service to be reinstated forthwith.

Statement 7 – Graham Lee Craven

- SBLN Consultation: The Loaded Question

In October last year, Bristol City Council conducted a public Consultation, for the
South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood.

When seeking opinions about their plans to impose a dozen modal filters, they phrased
Question 26 like this:

“Do you agree or disagree with the proposed measures to reduce through-traffic and
unsafe speeds in Southville?”

An alternative way of phrasing the same question could be like this:
“Do you agree or disagree with the proposed measures to make most journeys longer,
deflect more traffic onto the busiest roads, make life harder for disabled people and
their carers, increase the isolation of elderly relatives, scare off taxis and tradesmen,
create more pollution elsewhere, and play Russian roulette with fire engines?”

A third (neutral) possibility is this:

“Do you agree or disagree with the proposed scheme of modal filters?”

- My Transport Committee Question

For the public forum of the May 14th meeting of Bristol’s Transport and Connectivity
Policy Committee, I gave these three examples, and asked the following question:

So, having considered these alternative ways of conducting a meaningful public
consultation, does the Chair agree or disagree with the principle of asking a question in
a neutral manner, in order to get genuine results?

( ) Strongly agree ( ) Agree ( ) Neither agree nor disagree ( ) Disagree ( ) Strongly
disagree

Chose one option.

No additional words allowed.

- Bristol Council’s Officer Response

The Council’s published response was:

“Thank you for your question. The consultation report has recently been released, and
officers are in the process of reviewing the scheme design considering public feedback
alongside additional traffic data that was collected during the winter of 2025.

“The scheme will be redesigned so that it takes account of public feedback whilst
ensuring that it works as well as it can do and meet its objectives. Modal filters will still
be proposed at the appropriate locations but and details of these closures will be
provided as the scheme develops. The consultation and engagement methodology is
developed with the support of specialist consultation advice and publicised.”

- My Observations

This garbled response entirely ducked the question, and was almost identical to the
officer responses for disparate questions from numerous other members of the public.

So can the Mayor and Joint Committee please note the following:

1. In their SBLN Consultation, Bristol City Council published a number of loaded
questions like this, with the obvious aim being to skew the results in favour of
their proposals. Their officer response does not even acknowledge that any
aspect of this procedure was wrong.
2. Despite this disgraceful tactic, of the 1,296 Southville residents who responded
to this question, 12% Disagreed with the proposal, and 59% Strongly Disagreed
— giving an overwhelming majority of 71% against modal filters — more than
three times the 23% in favour.
3. Had the question been properly framed in a neutral manner, which
acknowledged that it was really about modal filters, the opposition would
undoubtedly have been even greater.
4. Despite this overwhelming rejection of modal filters, by the local residents who
are best placed to assess their pros and cons, the Council immediately stated
that modal filters would still be proposed in their revised scheme.
5. The Consultation closed on October 30th. So the administration must have
already have been well aware of this rejection of modal filters, when, 14
weeks later, on February 5th, they induced the Transport Committee to triple
the budget (to £2 Million), to prepare revised designs for the SBLN’s Full
Business Case.
6. The Transport Committee’s Councillors were not told that the modal filters had
already received an overwhelming rejection, before they were asked to
authorise this additional spending on revised designs.
7. The loaded question presents concerns about “through-traffic and unsafe
speeds in Southville” as proven facts. But when this Consultation was
published, on September 4th, the only traffic data available to the Council was
that which was gathered in June 2024…
8. Of the 25 ANPR cameras employed at that time in the SBLN study area, none of
them were within the Southville Zone, or at any of its entrances/exits. So, in
September 2025, the Council had no data to confirm any quantity of “through
traffic” on any roads in Southville.
9. And of the 21 ATC sensors employed at that time, none of them were within the
Southville Zone. So, in September 2025, the Council had no data to confirm any
degree of “unsafe speeds” on any roads in that area.
10. So the Consultation’s Question 26 presented unproven assumptions as
established facts. And then blatantly framed the question in a loaded manner,
in order to acquire the desired outcome.
11. Despite these shameful tactics, the people of Southville gave a resounding and
unequivocal rejection of modal filters.
12. In responses at WECA’s recent Overview and Scrutiny Committee, officers
wrote: “In September, at the outset of the council’s consultation, the Mayor
emphasised the importance of hearing local people’s voices and that feedback
will be a key part of how the combined authority assesses this bid.”
The results of the Southville Jury are in.

The answer is NO.

Statement 8 – Stuart Phelps

Statement regarding the Youth Guarantee

"Good afternoon, Mayor Godwin and members of the committee.

I am speaking today as the Chair of Baggator, a community enabling organisation rooted
in the inner-city wards of Easton and Lawrence Hill, Bristol—communities that
encompass Barton Hill and face some of the steepest socio-economic challenges in the
region.

We strongly welcome the ﬁndings of the landmark Milburn Report published last week.
Its diagnosis is profoundly accurate: our young people are not failing; it is a siloed, top-
down system that is failing them. The revelation that the state spends £25 keeping a
young person on welfare for every £1 spent helping them into work is a tragedy of
misallocated capital.

For too long, deprived urban communities like ours have been subject to what we call
'deprivation farming'. Large, outside or unrooted, providers use our local poverty
statistics to capture large contracts. They then deliver generic modules that completely
fail to reach the young people who are most detached from the labour market due to
complex trauma, poverty, and isolation.

True structural re-engagement cannot be achieved via a web portal, remote working, or
a 35 hour week. It requires trusted, physical, neighbourhood-level roots; hubs or people
who live there 24/7, 365.

As WECA designs its upcoming Youth Guarantee Trailblazer, you must look to the
innovative work already happening on the ground. For example, Baggator has recently
linked parents with SEND kids, Barton Hill Activity Club, and the Lawrence Hill
Neighbourhood Forum with a specialized SEND (Special Educational Needs and
Disabilities) project by Biomedical Sciences students from the University of Bristol.

By pairing the clinical, cutting-edge healthcare insights of ﬁnal year students with
trusted, hyper-local community relationships, we identiﬁed bespoke, holistic pathways
that address the deep-seated mental distress, neurodivergence, and health barriers
holding our young people back. This is what a true, modern, integrated 'Working State'
looks like. It is complex, person-centred, and deeply collaborative. Outside corporate
agencies cannot build these relationships; they cannot buy this trust.

We urge the Combined Authority to ensure its 'NEET Zero' strategy succeeds by adopting
a hyper-local procurement framework. We ask that a meaningful percentage of the Youth
Guarantee Trailblazer fund is ring-fenced for direct, devolved delivery by embedded
neighbourhood organisations within the region’s highest-deprivation wards.

Do not fund the status quo. Invest directly in the communities that possess the local trust
and expertise to solve these crises from the ground up.

Thank you."

Statement 9 – Catherine Davis

I am writing to provide my support for the necessity for the x91 bus in the Chew Valley. I
use it 5 days per week to get into Bristol for work. I dont drive so it is a very important
service for me.

I am in my 40s but i have seen many students and older people use it alike and it would
be so sad if this service is lost, for myself and the community. Bristol has so many
resources that we as a rural community need access to.

Statement 10 – Katie Hudson

I rely on the X91 to get into Bristol at least once a week to apply for the work – I am long
term unemployed – to attend Job Centre appointments (I go to the Bishopsworth Job
Centre – which is the only one that will accept people with the same postcode as
myself, if I can not get there I will not receive any financial support while I am looking for
work), to shop and visit the library.

My father also uses the X91/99 (this service allows him to access service that pass
along the A37) to get to and from appointments at Bristol Eye Hospital – it clearly says
on the letters confirming his appointments he is not to drive for several hours after his
appointment.

Travelling by bus allows everyone the sense of freedom/independence. There are quiet
a few people who live in the Chew Valley who do not drive – age, health conditions,
finance.
Statement 11 – Callie Marks

Here’s my statement for why the X91 is essential to the Chew Valley.

‘The X91 is a lifeline for us living in Ubley. My partner John has Parkinson’s and is no
longer able to drive. He uses the X91 regularly to get into Bristol for events and
appointments and would be stuck without it as taxis are not an option for us due to the
cost. The X91 means he can still travel independently, which is so important for his
wellbeing and allows him to get out and about.

My 18 yr old daughter also uses the X91 for getting around the valley to see her friends
and to go shopping in Bristol as she doesn’t drive yet.

Public transport is a lifeline which allows us to continue living in the Chew Valley.
Without it, only those with access to cars or the income to use taxis would be able to
live rurally. We love living in Ubley, but also love Bristol and all that it offers. The X91
allows us to enjoy both.

Please, please, please continue the X91. It is a vital rural service, allowing people of all
ages, mobility and wealth to live in the Chew Valley.’

Statement 12 – Kit Hawes

Please continue the X91!!

The X91 is a really important service for the Chew Valley.

It means I can get in and out of Bristol for work and leisure, make train and ongoing
transport connections and have visitors who aren't able to drive or cycle.

Like many families, me and my wife rely on friends and family for childcare, most of
whom don't drive and use the X91 to travel from Bristol to the village where we live. This
childcare is vital to our family, enabling us to to work and socialise, both of which would
become far more difficult if the service ceased to exist.

Please include all 8 bus stops for the X91 in your future plans.

Statement 13 – Teri Bramah

Concerns about Bristol Transport Committee Officer Responses

For the recent meeting of Bristol Council’s Transport Committee, I submitted three
public forum questions, on the subject of traffic data for the South Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood.
I shall quote the questions below, along with the Transport Dept “officer responses”,
and my reactions to those responses…

MY FIRST QUESTION WAS: “SBLN Statistics - Cherry-Picking the Data”

At February’s Transport Committee Elizabeth Newton made a statement, after
organising the SBLN march. She queried the way that the Council had done its traffic
surveys in December, after the consultation had already happened.

In response, the Transport Chair (Cllr Plowden) said: “I completely agree with you, that
data is important. But it’s also important not to select your data. You have to look at all
the data, and make sure you’re not cherry-picking it, I think.”

This got a big reaction, from the public gallery!

In recent weeks, the Council has been accused of not having any relevant statistics, to
support the claim on its website: “Traffic data show that high numbers of vehicles from
outside the area use residential streets in Southville as a cut-through to other
destinations.”

Various parties have requested that “traffic data”, on numerous occasions. But it was
never forthcoming.

However, on Wednesday 29th April, a few hours after articles on Bristol Live and Bristol
24/7 demonstrated how these conclusions could not possibly be reached from the
available data, suddenly some new documents were published on the council website.

The website’s introduction to The Floow Street Level Through Traffic Data says:

“This data allows us to look at through traffic on a road-by-road basis, and it shows
through-traffic of up to 85% on Raleigh Rd, 81% on Greenway Bush Lane and 56% on
Beauley Rd.”

When we look at the Floow Interactive Map, we find that, of the five time periods
available, council officers have cherry-picked the rather unrepresentative Weekend AM
Period.

And then, for Raleigh Road, they have cherry-picked “86% through traffic”, despite the
adjacent stretch of that road being assigned 60%, and each end of that road having just
43%.

And on Greenway Bush Lane, the 81% portion adjoins a stretch of road with 54%!

So, does the Transport Chair agree that, despite the disingenuous qualification of using
the words “up to…”, his colleagues have deliberately cherry-picked the worst-case
scenarios, in order to present an entirely unrepresentative figure?

THE OFFICER RESPONSE WAS:
Thank you for your question. Liveable Neighbourhoods work by creating cul-de-sacs in
residential areas so that all areas are still accessible by private car, but it is no longer
possible to short cut through an area. Instead, traffic will access via main roads which
are better suited to carrying vehicular traffic rather than residential streets.

A range of data has been collected to help inform the development of the scheme.

* This includes Automatic Number Plate Recognition which captures vehicles passing
in and out of cordon, which can be used to infer through traffic.

* Automatic Traffic Counts which capture the volume of traffic

* Traffic speed surveys

* FLOOW data (telematics technology that monitors how people drive)

This data helps officers revise the scheme design in line with government guidance on
area wide active travel schemes. Further analysis and transport modelling will be
undertaken as part of the Full Business Case.

There is also a strong strategic case for Liveable Neighbourhoods within the city due to
the contribution they make towards public health, mode shift and road safety. The
EBLN 6-month monitoring report demonstrates how the schemes have worked locally,
delivering a net reduction in traffic levels and an increase in active travel.

MY REACTION IS:

Officers ignored my question, and trotted out the same generic response which was
also issued to a large number of other people, who asked completely different
questions.

Only the sentence about Automatic Number Plate Recognition cameras was relevant.
But no inference about “Through Traffic” can be made for Southville, because none of
those cameras were placed in positions which could possibly provide any relevant
information.

And the Floow data is gibberish, assigning high levels of “Through Traffic” (over 80%) to
numerous short cul-de-sacs!

The proper definition of “Through Traffic” is traffic which is “cutting through” Southville,
from one side of the neighbourhood to the other. So how can a cul-de-sac (which leads
to nowhere) possibly harbour ANY “Through Traffic” at all?!

Yet that is what the Floow map tells us is happening!

Whatever the Floow data is measuring, it is clearly not really “Through Traffic”!

So ALL of the Floow statistics are meaningless, which may be why the Interactive Map
was not released until nine months after it was created, in July last year.
And it appears that it was only released now, as a panic measure, to deflect bad
publicity about the council’s repeated failure to present any plausible statistics at all.

MY SECOND QUESTION WAS: “SBLN Statistics - Issued to the Media”

Also on Wednesday 29th April, the council’s Press Office issued a statement to the
BBC, saying:

‘Councillor Tony Dyer, Leader of Bristol City Council, said: “In June 2024, we started
monitoring motor vehicle origin and destination data, along with traffic volumes and
speeds, to help inform our plans for the SBLN project. This included placing 25 cameras
throughout the project area, with 5 at entry and exit points to Southville. These showed
an estimated 10 to 13 per cent of through-traffic in Southville. Following this high level
analysis, we have commissioned more monitoring across the area to develop our
proposals further, including 122 traffic counts and telematics traffic data, which
provides more detail on through-traffic levels.”’

This text is almost identical to the text which was added on the council website, on that
day. So, unless we’re expected to believe that the Council Leader writes the website,
these words must have been attributed to him, by council officers, presumably with his
agreement.

Based on this statement, “said” by Cllr Dyer, on the 3rd May edition of Politics West the
BBC broadcast this “10-13% through-traffic in Southville” and also the “up to 85% in
Raleigh Road”.

The release of this “information” must obviously have been approved by senior staff in
the council.

So please name every manager, executive and councillor, who approved the release of
these statistics, and their attribution to the Council Leader.

(I note that the council’s webpage for the Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee
has a link to the Agenda Reports Pack, which includes a Public Information Sheet,
which says: “Officer’s names below Head of Service, will be replaced by the Officer’s
job title.” So I expect all Heads and above to be named, and job titles provided for
others.)

THE OFFICER RESPONSE WAS:

It is not council policy to release this information, and it is not clear what purpose
would be achieved by releasing this information. The case for the scheme needs to be
made through agreed Department for Transport and HM Treasury appraisal guidelines,
which officers have been using in good faith.
MY REACTION IS:

I quoted the “council policy” on naming officers, in the final sentence of my question.
Their policy is that Heads of Service and above should be named.

Clearly the “purpose” of releasing this information is to hold senior managers
responsible for their actions, as is expected in every other walk of life. Just because
they work for the council, that does not bestow a divine right to preserve their own
anonymity, and evade accountability.

No doubt readers will draw their own conclusions, about this failure to provide the
requested transparency.

As for the “10-13% through-traffic in Southville”, I understand this estimate came from
a report by Arup, who failed to provide any explanation for how this figure was
“calculated”. So it is baffling that council officers used this number as the headline
“justification” for the SBLN, and attributed it to the Council Leader.

And the additional claim (also attributed to the Council Leader) that five ANPR cameras
were placed “… at entry and exit points to Southville” is provably false. No ANPR
cameras were ever placed at ANY of the Southville zone's “entry and exit points”.

MY THIRD QUESTION WAS: “SBLN Statistics - Other Recipients”

I understand that this new data (“10-13%”, and “85%”, etc) was also sent to other
recipients, including Bristol South MP, Karin Smyth.

Please state the date, time and recipient, of all releases of this newly-discovered
“data”.

THE OFFICER RESPONSE WAS:

“Thank you for your question. All of the relevant traffic data has been published online
and is publicly available.”

MY REACTION IS:

So officers ducked yet another question, and failed to reveal the identities of whichever
other VIPs and media outlets (etc) were supplied with these misleading statistics.

Again, readers will draw their own conclusions.

But meanwhile, let us note that all of these Transport Committee “officer responses”
will of course have been approved for publication, by the council's Transport Chair, and
also by the most senior “Heads” of the Transport Dept…
Statement 14 – Cllr David Harding

I am writing this statement as one of the ward councillors for the Chew Valley.

I am very concerned to have learned, very late in the day, that the very successful X91
route in and out of Bristol has had significant issues with the quality of delivery since
the WESTlocal scheme, (managed by Chew Valley CIC Sustainable Transport) ended
and WECA took over the management of this route with a change of operator from The
Big Lemon to Eurocoaches in April.

As a resident of Chew Magna I am no longer able to use the X91 service because
although there is a stop on the return journey there is no longer a stopping place in
Chew Magna on the outward journey. This is also impacting many of my parishioners.

I have 2 concerns about this: firstly, at a site visit I attended, it was clear that the B&NES
and WECA transport officers gave their approval to a new stop in Chew Magna (in a new
place that has not yet been fully risk assessed) but did not take action to immediately
put this in place as a temporary stop or allow existing stopping arrangements that had
been in place for 18 months to continue in the interim. The same is true of the stop
outside Chew Valley School.

As a result Chew Magna is cut off from the route from April to July 2026.

Chew Magna is one of the larger villages in the Chew Valley and would see many people
getting on board each day ( a range of people for a range of different needs such as
work, hospital appointments and essential shopping across the week). Feedback on
the service up until April was excellent and this is evidenced both in 'The Great Big Bus
Survey’ and ‘The Future of Local Bus Services: What the Chew Valley wants’ reports
which have been shared with WECA.

Many people using the X91 have been persuaded to try bus travel because of the hard
work of the Chew Valley Sustainable Transport Group. Some of these passengers are
people with no other means of travel, but also many who could drive, saw this as one
helpful way they could reduce their own carbon footprint, avoid adding to congestion in
Bristol and improve air quality. In a time of climate emergency this kind of behaviour
change is essential and this removal of the stop is a significant backward step.

In addition, I am very concerned that in an effort to create a bus network across the
B&NES area WECA has failed to properly consult with local communities and has not
made use of the Sustainable Transport Group or our ward councillors to do so. Surely
the experience of the Sustainable Transport group that WECA have had across the 18
months where these volunteers have gone so much to reach into the community would
make this an obvious group to include in any consultation process? Surely too, WECA
should be speaking to ward councillors as a matter of course.
The other thing you need to understand about the X91 is that it was also offering a
service to people travelling between the 8 villages in the Chew Valley that it serves:
cutting Chew Magna off this route removes the bus as a way to get to Bristol but also as
a way to get to local GP surgeries, to education, work and social activities in the local
area. Most recently I have been told of a plan to cut Ubley, Compton Martin, West
Harptree and East Harptree from the route in order to fund a new, overly circuitous bus
that takes 2 hours to get from Bristol to Bath. I gather this concept came from work with
an external consultant who conducted a paper exercise rather than finding out what
local people want.

Local people want the X91, and I gather the Sustainable Transport group have proposed
a sensible solution to covering a similar network footprint whilst still retaining the X91.
Please listen to this suggestion and have the common sense to adopt it.

Statement 15 – Guy Leopold

TITLE: “Through Traffic” or NO Traffic…?

To justify its plans for modal filters in the South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood, Bristol
Council claimed to have statistics which proved that large quantities of vehicles are
plaguing the streets of Southville, by “cutting through”, from North Street to Coronation
Road.

When this claim was challenged, the council responded, by publishing “The Floow
Through Traffic Interactive Map” on its website.

And it introduces this by claiming that “it shows through-traffic of up to 85% on Raleigh
Rd…”

This statistic was then quoted on BBC1’s Politics West.

But when we look on the interactive map, we realise that this statistic has been “cherry-
picked” from a very wide range of numbers for Raleigh Road, and relates only to a short
length of the road, near the Tobacco Factory.

And in order to find the highest possible percentage, the Council has chosen the time
period which is labelled “Weekend AM” — which is the average of Saturday and Sunday
mornings.

But Raleigh Road is closed every Sunday, for the Tobacco Factory Sunday Market!

And as this road is closed, there can be NO “through traffic” here, during this time!
It is mathematically impossible, for there to be “85% through traffic” on a road which is
closed for 50% of the specified time.

This statistic has been specially selected by the Transport Dept.

But if that is nonsense, then how can we have any faith in the rest of this data?

Statement 16 – Angela Ardron

The X91 is a lifeline for both my husband and I. As a single-car family with young
children, we rely heavily on the bus to commute to and from Bristol for work. Since the
removal of the Chew Magna stop, we have been unable to use the service and have
instead been forced to rely on driving or expensive taxi journeys.
Commuters are the lifeblood of rural bus routes. We provide a consistent and reliable
source of revenue through regular, year-round use, helping to support the viability of
services for other groups who depend on public transport. However, since WECA took
over the route design, commuters appear to have been overlooked and discouraged
from using the service.
Chew Magna is one of the largest villages in the Chew Valley, with many residents
commuting into Bristol each day. By removing the stop and introducing less commuter-
friendly routing, a valuable opportunity has been missed to increase passenger
numbers, boost revenue, and encourage greater use of public transport.
I urge WECA to ensure that the needs of regular commuters are properly reflected in the
redesign of the X91 service.

Statement 17 – James Ardron

As a family of four with two young children, we have made a conscious decision to
operate with a single vehicle, both to reduce our environmental impact and to help
manage rising living costs. This has been possible because the 672 service, and more
recently the X91, have provided a reliable and practical transport option for commuting
to work, attending hospital appointments, and accessing Bristol Temple Meads for
onward travel.

Without this service, I would be forced to rely on expensive taxi journeys or make
alternative travel arrangements, which are not always feasible for work commitments
or fixed appointments. The loss of this service would have a huge impact as we are not
in a position to purchase a second car, neither do we want to place further strain on
already stretched household budgets and force additional traffic to local roads.

We have successfully managed with a single vehicle for almost two years, and the X91
has been an affordable, sustainable, and dependable transport option. It is not only
important for our family but also serves as a vital lifeline for many people across the
wider community.

I strongly urge you to ensure that the X91, including all eight stops throughout the Chew
Valley and specifically Chew Magna, remains part of your future bus strategy. Evidence
from the past 18 months—particularly before the transition to Eurocoaches—
demonstrates that the service has been well used, successful, and has significant
potential for further growth in passenger numbers and capacity. Continued investment
in the route would help reduce car dependency and remove more vehicles from our
already congested roads, delivering both environmental and social benefits to the
region.

Statement 18 – Tim Clay

Questions ducked by Transport Committee

On 14th May, Bristol City Council held its regular Transport and Connectivity
Committee meeting, so I submitted the following three questions via the Public Forum
system…

Q 1: The Arup SBLN “Through Traffic” Analysis

The Council recently published a document produced by Arup in November 2024,
which used some traffic surveys to estimate quantities of “Through Traffic” in various
“Sectors” of the proposed South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhoods.

It can be downloaded by members of the public, [link redacted by Democratic Services]

This document has no page numbers, author, title page or specific date, so may be an
extract from a larger document, which has not been released.

Please explain the provenance of this five-page document, and explain why other pages
were not published.

Q 2: Arup’s Methodology

The Arup Analysis states in its Summary, that it was produced by analysing ANPR survey
data, from June 2024.

The Council’s website introduction states: “This included placing 25 ANPR cameras
throughout the project area, with 5 at entry and exit points to Southville.”

The 2024 ANPR survey did indeed have 25 cameras placed throughout the SBLN study
area, but none of these were within the Southville Sector, and only two were on its
perimeter.
None of the cameras were placed at any of the main “entry and exit points” to the
Southville sector, like Raleigh Road, Greenway Bush Lane, Beauley Road, Merrywood
Road, and Dean Lane.

So the website’s claim is not true.

But of course, this was because, in June 2024, the Council did not yet know that the
main focus of the SBLN project would be the Southville Sector.

As there were no cameras placed in positions conducive to demonstrating how any
quantity of “through traffic” could be deduced, it is difficult to imagine how Arup
calculated any such numbers.

And this five-page document contains no explanation of their methodology.

Therefore please answer one of the following:

EITHER: If Arup provided a written explanation of their methodology, please quote it
here in full.

OR: If Arup provided no such explanation, then please explain why the Council did not
request it, and why Arup’s figures are being quoted to the media, as definitive data.

Q 3: Arup’s “Through Traffic” Estimate

The Arup report estimates “through traffic” in the Southville Sector as ranging from 10%
in the Morning Peak to 13% in the Evening Peak.

And this 10-13% figure has recently been issued to outside bodies, and broadcast by
the BBC.

However, when this estimate was “calculated” by Arup, in November 2024, the map in
this document shows that the eastern perimeter of the Southville Sector was running
along East Street and Bedminster Parade.

However, the SBLN proposals published in September 2025 now show the eastern
perimeter running along Dean Lane and St John’s Road.

Dean Lane is a busy road, but based on Arup’s 2024 map, it would have been classed
within their estimates as an “internal road”, with its high numbers of vehicles deemed
to be “through traffic”.

But as the perimeter has changed, to run along Dean Lane, that road’s vehicles are now
legitimate traffic on a boundary road, and therefore NOT “through traffic”, any more.
Assuming the 10-13% figure for “through traffic” in Southville was accurate in the first
place (and there is no reason to believe it was), it should clearly have been revised
considerably downwards, to remove Dean Lane’s significant volume of traffic from this
number.

So why was that revision not done, before these 18-month-old statistics were recently
issued to the media?

All three questions received the following Officer Response:

Thank you for your question. Liveable Neighbourhoods work by creating cul-de-sacs in
residential areas so that all areas are still accessible by private car, but it is no longer
possible to short cut through an area. Instead, traffic will access via main roads which
are better suited to carrying vehicular traffic rather than residential streets.

A range of data has been collected to help inform the development of the scheme.

• This includes Automatic Number Plate Recognition which captures vehicles passing
in and out of cordon, which can be used to infer through traffic.

• Automatic Traffic Counts which capture the volume of traffic

• Traffic speed surveys

• FLOOW data (telematics technology that monitors how people drive)

This data helps officers revise the scheme design in line with government guidance on
area wide active travel schemes. Further analysis and transport modelling will be
undertaken as part of the Full Business Case.

There is also a strong strategic case for Liveable Neighbourhoods within the city due to
the contribution they make towards public health, mode shift and road safety. The EBLN
6-month monitoring report demonstrates how the schemes have worked locally,
delivering a net reduction in traffic levels and an increase in active travel.

CONCLUSIONS

This officer response obviously fails to address any of my questions.

And identical text was also used to “respond” to more than a dozen questions
submitted by other participants, many of which were also querying the supposed
“traffic data” published by the council.

It is difficult to express my disgust, for this shameful abuse of the Public Forum
procedure.
If the council has traffic data which supports its proposals for the SBLN, then it should
be easy for them to express it in layman’s terms, and to address any queries which
arise.

Their abject failure to do so clearly demonstrates that they have no credible data to
justify their plans, so are wasting millions of pounds on a hare-brained vanity project,
which will cause untold misery to the residents of Southville.

I hope that, when presented with the SBLN Full Business Case, WECA will thoroughly
interrogate any and all “traffic data” contained within, and reject any proposals which
are not supported by robust evidence.

Statement 19 – Jackie Head

I am speaking today on behalf of Chew Valley CIC Sustainable Transport Partnership
with a single purpose: We want you to save the X91 bus service.

WESTlocal was designed to empower local communities to research community
needs, design new bus routes aligned to these and then work with an operator of our
choice to bring about the service and continuously improve it over time. We have kept
our part of the bargain.

In the 18 months we were overseeing the X91 service we carried out 4 major surveys in
our area, held 3 large consultation events, presented to numerous community groups,
attended local events and set up our own events to promote the service. We worked
with local businesses to get them to promote the route and ensured that every person
living in the area received a paper copy of the timetable (that’s about 4000 door to door
deliveries.) We set up a facebook community (656 members) and instagram and have a
Whatsapp community to help people navigate travelling on the route.

As a result the X91 has become a popular local service that followed an overall growth
arc from nothing to a successful service to 8 local villages in the Chew Valley. It
provides a vital service to key locations: Parson Street and Temple Meads stations and
Bristol Bus Station, to hospital appointments, to educational opportunities,
supermarkets for the weekly shop (there are no large supermarkets in the Chew Valley)
and for leisure. And it brings us to Bristol for democratic meetings.

It is disappointing that there has been a significant drop in quality since the route was
taken under direct control by WECA and the operator was changed from The Big Lemon
to Eurocoaches. Decisions made without consulting our group have led to 2 villages
(Chew Magna and Dundry) being effectively cut off from the route as you can travel one
way and not the other, something we have raised with the scrutiny committee this
week.
Part of what I want to do is present you with a petition named ”Continue the X91 Chew
Valley Sprint bus service after July 2026”. At time of writing it has 1037 signatures.

Mayor Godwin, I know you are a big fan of public transport and of buses, I know it
matters to you that it is available to all and priced in a way that makes it possible for
everyone to use. I know you value community engagement and creativity born in the
community so please, listen to our plea to intervene with the granular detail of rural bus
services after July 2026 and keep the X91 as it is rather than following a plan created on
paper, largely by an external consultant and without community engagement, which
effective halves the number of villages the route would serve.

I want to keep coming to these meetings, but if the current plans go ahead my village
will be cut from the route (along with 3 others: that’s Ubley, Compton Martin, West
Harptree and East Harptree) and so I will not be able to attend. I have been fighting
tirelessly to increase bus travel for the last 6 years and that would be a rather sad end to
the story.

I am just one person and this petition shows, at least 1037 others feel the same.

Please, do the right thing, do the sensible thing, do the fair thing, keep the X91 going.

Statement 20 – Elaine Workman

As a resident of the Chew Valley I would like to raise my voice for the X91 Chew Valley
Sprint bus, last year I needed to attend Chemotherapy treatments for Breast Cancer
(and associated tests and PIC line care) in our wonderful BRI hospital in the centre of
Bristol on a weekly basis.

If it hadn't been for the X91 Chew Valley Sprint direct bus to Bristol I would have not
been able to attend these sessions. I'm not sure I could have afforded to get Taxi's and
even if I could I am not sure there is much availability here.

The bus has been a reliable and safe space for me to travel onboard and the bus
operator "The Big Lemon" as a CIC organisation, offered exceptional customer service
and care during this time, this was especially important to me, as at times I looked very
noticeable in my head scarf.

I still very much need this bus service, as although my cancer has completely gone, I
am still receiving treatment at the BRI and in fact the X91 has been fantastic at linking
me to people and places as I work remotely and working in cafes in the City centre
helps me not be so isolated during the working week.
My ask is a simple one - we need this bus, for the whole of the Chew Valley, it's the only
bus network to Bristol that we have and it is so very important.

Statement 21 – Keith Clark

Losing the X91 service would be a sad loss indeed. With age related problems of my
own slowly multiplying and a wife in need of regular chemotherapy and consultation
visits to both South Bristol Hospital in Hengrove and the BRI, the fear of having no
alternative to taking her by car myself or relying on the goodwill of friends looms large-
please don’t cut this lifeline for residents of the Chew Valley!

Statement 22 – Jill Baker

I am writing to express my support for and need of the X91 Sprint.

The X91 is essential for me and many others to get to and from work in Bristol. The
timing is great for commuters. I’ve travelled on it so many times I’ve got to know the
regulars and we look out for one another. The drivers are very friendly and helpful too
and always have a friendly word for us. It is fast and convenient.

The alternative for me is to drive petrol car in, I’ve tried lift sharing but it’s very hit and
miss. Driving in by myself adds to congestion and reduces air quality. I hate making air
quality worse and I really don’t enjoy slowly crawling through heavily congested traffic
in my car.

Usually when I’m on the bus I catch up with other passengers, practice languages on
my phone or get a little work done.

Please support the X91.

Statement 23 – Judith Worthington

I wish to register my objection to the proposed South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
scheme.

As a 67-year-old resident, I value the importance of maintaining my independence and
mobility. Although I remain active and in good health, I am increasingly conscious of the
challenges that can come with ageing. I am concerned that the proposed measures
may reduce my ability to access essential services, maintain social connections, and
travel safely and conveniently in the future.
I rely on my car for a variety of journeys that cannot easily be replaced by walking,
cycling, or public transport. My GP surgery and dentist are not located within my
immediate neighbourhood, and regular access to healthcare is particularly important
as people grow older. I am concerned that restrictions on vehicle movements could
make these journeys more difficult and time-consuming.

I also own a dog and regularly travel to different locations for exercise and recreation.
Car-sharing or hire car schemes are not a practical option for me, particularly when
travelling with a dog. Furthermore, public transport does not provide a realistic
alternative for many of my journeys. The number 24 bus operates only twice an hour,
limiting flexibility and making it difficult to rely upon for appointments and other
commitments. Many of my journeys are also to destinations outside central Bristol,
where public transport connections are often less convenient.

In addition, many of my friends and social contacts do not live locally. The ability to
travel easily by car allows me to maintain these important relationships, which are
essential for wellbeing and help prevent social isolation, particularly as people get
older.

I am also concerned about personal safety. As a woman living alone, there are
occasions when I need to walk after dark. While quieter streets may be seen as a
benefit by some, very quiet or isolated roads can feel intimidating and less safe,
particularly for older women walking alone at night. The presence of passing traffic can
provide reassurance and a sense that an area remains active and observed.

While I appreciate the intention to improve neighbourhoods and encourage active
travel, I do not believe the current proposal adequately reflects the needs of older
residents, those who rely on their cars for essential journeys, or concerns relating to
personal safety. I therefore object to the South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood scheme
in its current form and ask that these issues be given further consideration before any
decision is made.

Statement 24 – Barbara Lawrence

I am resident in Gloucestershire with close proximity to the South Gloucestershire
boundary and I am part of the cross boundary campaign 'Save the Yate to Wotton under
Edge bus route'.

Given the importance of the Y8 Yate link bus route which is pivotal in connecting towns
and villages across South Glos and Gloucestershire, enabling residents and visitors to
access the shared services and amenities and putting buses back at the heart of
communities.
We argue that authorities responsible for provision of bus services across the region
must continue working collaboratively in tailoring services to meet local needs and to
protect against cuts to rural/semi rural bus routes.

While we realise the challenges you face in allocation of funding subsidised bus routes
like the Y8. It is crucial that you assess public commitment and benefits that has
reduced public transport inequality.

Current construction of Charfield Railway Station at £41 m and ongoing housing
development requires authorities to ensure necessary infrastructure is in place. Key
roads in Charfield already suffer congestion. Integrated bus and rail links are vital to
balance population growth and sustainability.

It is inevitable that increasing numbers of post 16 students will be reliant on a regular
timetabled bus route to attend our successful Katherine Lady Berkley School and
others who choose to enrol at SGC college in Filton need an early bus to reach Yate Rail
Station by 8am.

Demand Responsive Transport does not have scope to get you where you want to go, or
at a time you need to get there. Cost PPJ is significantly more than subsidised bus
routes which provide regular accessibility to work, post 16 education, medical facilities,
tourism, affordable shopping, recreation and onward transport links.

We ask you to continue working collaboratively with South Gloucestershire and
Gloucestershire County Council in assessing the benefits to commuters, businesses
and local economies and to reach allocation of funding decisions around value for
money and impact evaluation.

Statement 25 – Cllr Simon McCombe

I wish to place on record my profound disappointment regarding the proposed
withdrawal of the X91 bus service serving Ubley and the wider Chew Valley area.

As the ward councillor representing residents in Mendip Ward, I am particularly
concerned that myself and my fellow Chew Valley Ward Councillors Anna Box and
David Harding were not consulted at any stage during the development of these
proposals. Local elected members are often the first point of contact for residents
affected by changes to public services, and it is disappointing that those with direct
knowledge of the communities we serve, we were not given the opportunity to
contribute before decisions of this significance were considered.

The X91 provides a direct and valuable link between our rural communities and Bristol.
For many residents, particularly older people, it is far more than simply a bus route. It
provides access to healthcare appointments, shopping, social activities and essential
services. A significant number of elderly residents rely on the service because they do
not drive and have limited alternative transport options. Replacing a direct service with
one that requires interchange will inevitably make journeys longer, more complicated
and, for some, simply impractical.

I am equally concerned about the impact on young people. School and college
students use the service to access education and training opportunities. Any reduction
in connectivity risks creating additional barriers for those who already face challenges
living in rural communities. Public transport should be enabling access to education,
not making it more difficult.

What makes this proposal particularly frustrating is that a credible and practical
alternative has already been put forward by the Chew Valley Sustainable Group. Their
proposal is, in my view, by far the more sensible option. It has been developed with a
detailed understanding of local travel patterns and community needs and seeks to
retain vital connectivity for residents whilst making more effective use of available
resources.

The Chew Valley Sustainable Group has invested considerable time and effort in
gathering evidence, collecting data and engaging with local residents to support its
proposal. It appears that WECA has given insufficient weight to the evidence and data
provided by the last published survey . Residents will find it difficult to understand why
locally gathered evidence and community-led solutions have not been fully reflected in
the decision-making process.

While I appreciate the financial pressures facing WECA and the need to review services
periodically, decisions affecting rural communities must take account of the social
value of public transport, not solely passenger numbers or operational costs. Rural
residents already face fewer transport options than those living in urban areas, and
each reduction in service further increases isolation and dependence on private
vehicles.

I would urge WECA to reconsider the withdrawal of the X91, and properly engage with
ward councillors and affected communities, and to give full and fair consideration to
the alternative proposal put forward by the Chew Valley Sustainable Group and the
evidence that supports it.

Public transport is not merely a means of travel; for many people in our villages, it is a
lifeline. We should be strengthening these connections, not weakening them.
Statement 26 – Melissa Topping

My name is Melissa Topping, and I am speaking today on behalf of the East Bristol Open
Roads campaign group and the Bristol East Disabled Society (BEDS). As you prepare for
the independent review of the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood (EBLN) trial this July,
we ask that you take note of critical, systemic evidence that challenges the
foundational fairness and scientific credibility of this scheme.

Our position is clear: the EBLN trial has fundamentally failed our community—
particularly our oldest and most vulnerable residents—and must be completely
removed, rather than refined.

1. Inequitable Foundation & Shifting Deflections.

In recent months, Bristol City Council has repeatedly pointed to the "success" of the
East Bristol trial to justify rolling out similar measures in South Bristol.

However, a recent, extensive report by the Bristol Disability Equality Forum (BDEF)—
titled Listening to Experience—confirms that the very infrastructure celebrated in East
Bristol actively discriminates against Disabled people.

It treats vehicle use as a "lifestyle choice" rather than an absolute mobility necessity. If
a traffic scheme achieves environmental metrics by cutting off essential access,
trapping non-Blue Badge drivers behind restrictive ANPR gates, and forcing vulnerable
residents into social isolation, it cannot be deemed a success. It is baseline
inequitable.

2. Admissions of Local Authority Failure.

• Through recent council project management responses, explicit admissions
have come to light that mirror the exact procedural and structural failures we
have endured during the EBLN trial:
• Failure to Mitigate for Non-Blue Badge Holders: The council admits it is too
"challenging" to offer ANPR camera exemptions to Disabled people who do not
possess a Blue Badge. Because a massive portion of the disabled population
relies on motor vehicles but does not qualify for a badge, this rigid setup
represents an ongoing, systemic breach of equal access. Along with planters not
having Blue Badge access. . We don't magically fly over them. Many disabled do
not drive or have a Blue badge, but still need to be transported to places. This is
not being accounted for.
• Hostile Environments Prior to Upgrades: The council has admitted that
accessible pavement upgrades, dropped kerbs, and adequate lighting are only
delivered alongside or after roadblocks are put in place due to budget and
contracting constraints. This means that for the entire duration of our trial, the
physical environment was made more hostile and dangerous without the
necessary safety mitigations being established first. In the future is too late for
this trial.
• Consultation and Co-Design Deficiencies: While the council now admits they
must bring in Disabled People's Organisations at "project inception" for future
schemes, EBLN was dropped on us as a pre-packaged trial framework. We were
forced to fight retroactively against rigid physical structures rather than being
allowed to co-design local access.

3. Flawed Data and Missing Metrics.

We also urge WECA’s independent review team to look closely at the severe data flaws
and gaps within the official EBLN monitoring reports:

• Strategic Monitor Placement: Traffic counters were placed directly next to
planters and modal filters, showing artificially low or zero traffic while
completely ignoring the displaced, idling congestion on our boundary roads.
• The "10mph" Blind Spot: The monitoring equipment fails to record vehicles
moving slower than 10mph. Consequently, nose-to-tail, slow-moving queues
have been entirely omitted from official statistics, rendering the data
scientifically incredible.
• Distorted Bus and Survey Metrics: The reported 5% increase in bus use is
mathematically inflated because it incorporates the newly introduced Number
16 line, which had a baseline of zero prior to the scheme. Meanwhile, journey
times on crucial perimeter routes like Blackswarth Road have seen a staggering
80% increase.

4. Our Alternative: True Safety, Not Segregation.

We want to be entirely unambiguous about what our community is asking for. We want
a complete return to the quiet streets we already enjoyed prior to this heavy-handed
intervention. Our neighbourhoods must be kept open to everyone, ensuring equal
access for all residents and essential services.

However, we are not anti-safety. Instead of divisive road closures and physical barriers
that trap residents, what our streets genuinely require is the addition of true speed-
calming measures implemented evenly throughout the entire area. This is how we
achieve real, inclusive road safety without sacrificing the mobility of our most
vulnerable neighbours. We would welcome the opportunity to work together with you
on this.

Conclusion.
A three-week turnaround between the closing of the EBLN consultation and the
council’s decision to proceed strongly indicates pre-determination, violating the fourth
Gunning Principle of conscientious consideration. The council’s shift to a much slower,
more cautious 6-month data review in South Bristol is a silent, moral admission that the
East Bristol fast-track method was a failure in democratic engagement.

If the foundational framework of these Liveable Neighbourhoods is now acknowledged
by the council to be structurally flawed, exclusionary, and harmful to protected
characteristics without extensive pre-trial co-design, then the EBLN trial—which lacked
all of these critical safeguards—cannot legally or equitably be made permanent.

We formally request that WECA takes full account of these data flaws, local authority
admissions, and systemic breaches of the Equality Act 2010 during your review. For the
wellbeing, safety, and basic freedom of East Bristol residents, this trial must be brought
to an end and removed.

Thank you for your time and for listening to our community.

Statement 27 – Christina Biggs

Bristol Rail Campaign welcomes the news that North Somerset Council have voted to
join the West of England Combined Authority.

As well as delivering the Portishead Line, N Somerset have much to gain from their new
partnership:

1. Reopening of Uphill Station, on the loop just north of the junction with the main line,
on Loxton Road. This would serve the Weston Hospital and the Weston College campus
as well as the Locking housing estate and Uphill Village and the River Axe boating
community and nature reserve;

2. Improved disabled access at Nailsea and Backwell station;

3. A light rail spur to the Airport, whether as part of our suggested Callington Road light
rail ink or direct from the main line at Long Ashton;

4. Accessing funds for the upkeep of the Somerset Levels, including Network Rail’s duty
to maintain the rail embankment and WECA’s Blue Infrastructure plan. We note the
answer to our formal question at the 27th March 2026 meeting, quoted below.

5. Better bus services across N Somerset, with effective rail-bus interchange
Statement 28 – Sally Calverly

I wish to make a statement in favour of the X91 bus route which takes in East Harptree.

This is a critical route for villagers: not everyone can afford a car and those who can may
not be able to afford the parking charges in Bristol. When we conducted the village
survey, one resident’s response struck a chord: they said that their income depended
on the bus timetable - simple as that. It’s easy to forget how critical this service is!

When I was unable to drive (for health reasons), the bus coming to East Harptree meant
I could continue working in Bristol. Without the bus that would have bed. Impossible.

I know I am not alone in this. We’ve talked about it in the pub: this service gets us to
Hospital appointments, to jobs and to the shops - or at least it did when it went into
Chew Magna.

We’ve used it to get between villages for days out; my kids used it (before they left
home). I’ve used it to link up with trains to London and Cardiff. Friends have caught the
bus from Bristol Temple Meads to get here.

This bus service is a lifeline between rural communities and the city. Please don’t
assume we are all rich and privileged out here! We need this bus service.

Statement 29 – Helen Hughes

I submitted the following question regarding the SBLNs to the WECA Overview and
Scrutiny Committee Meeting on 1st June:
‘Given that it is now widely known that Bristol City Council has, and continues to,
cherry-pick data in an attempt to prove a high level of through traffic in Southville, and
that proof of such traffic is necessary to secure funding for the Liveable Neighbourhood
scheme - which must include modal filters - can you please clarify precisely under
which criteria you would grant the funding necessary for a trial scheme in that area? For
example, what must the traffic data concretely show?’
The response, which began with a generic paragraph also received by others who
submitted questions on the SBLNs, was followed by this second paragraph:
‘Bristol City Council is responsible for the development and design of any proposed
project, including the collection and interpretation of local traffic data. The combined
authority does not apply a single traffic threshold or specific level of through traffic that
would automatically secure or prevent funding. Funding rules do not require the use of
any specific traffic management measures. Proposed interventions are developed by
the relevant highway authority. Schemes must also comply with national design
standards and consider a range of other factors.’
I interpret ‘the combined authority does not apply a single traffic threshold or specific
level of through traffic that would automatically secure or prevent funding’ as implying
that there is no specific metric of traffic data necessary for BCC to secure funding from
WECA for LTNs.
Questions submitted by [name redacted] to this committee make clear that this
response appears to be in direct contradiction to the DfT’s statutory guidance, which
states that for an LTN to be implemented it must lead to a reduction or even removal of
through traffic in an area.
It is difficult to comprehend how funding could be granted to reduce through traffic
when there is no proof that there is a problem that needs fixing.
If WECA is following BCC in instead relying on subjective perceptions of levels of
through traffic by some to implement major changes to our residential roads and a
consequent upheaval to the lives of many, this would imply some worryingly arbitrary
and potentially biased decision making regarding the use of public funds.
The statement ‘Funding rules do not require the use of any specific traffic management
measures’ further appears to contradict BCC’s own clear statement that modal filters
must be a part of the schemes if the combined authority is to agree funding (again, see
the questions submitted by [name redacted by Democratic Services]).

Further, ‘Schemes must also comply with national design standards and consider a
range of other factors’ hints at the use of modal filters after all, because they are the
baseline of LTN schemes throughout the country.
The response to my question is therefore very confusing on several counts.
I urge WECA to resolve these contradictions and ensure funding for LTNs in Southville
and all other areas is only granted if:

a) the necessary traffic data criteria are crystal clear and formalised, i.e. ‘high
levels of through traffic’ must be given a specific threshold value
b) there is incontrovertible evidence that the actual traffic data meets these
criteria, i.e. that there are indeed such high levels of through traffic that people’s
lives are in serious danger from motor vehicle collisions and air pollution
c) it is clear to all whether or not the implementation of modal filters is necessary
to access this funding

Statement 30 – Peter Luckett

The X91 service is an essential service linking the Chew Valley to Bristol. As a regular
user, I see people using it for a variety of reasons eg, to link with other transport, get to
work/school/college, attend medical appointments at the Bristol hospitals and RUH
Bath, do supermarket shopping as well as accessing other facilities, Cabot Circus,
museums, restaurants etc.
As I work in Bristol the X91 has offered me the opportunity to reduce my carbon
footprint. I sold my car in favour of commuting on the X91 to and from the office. But it
has given me much more - it is a community of its own where passengers care for and
look out for one another. It offers me a chance to unwind at the end of a busy day.

Please include the X91 and all 8 stops in the valley in your future bus network. Include
Chew Magna as it was previously part of the route. Many thanks.

Statement 31 – Bev & Jenny Cruse

We are writing to say how essential the X91 bus service is to the Chew Valley. It is used
by commuters to Bristol and beyond through its link to trains, by people travelling to
hospital appointments, students getting to college and taking people to supermarkets
which we don’t have in the Chew Valley.

It accommodates the needs of those with mobility issues and prevents social isolation
for people of all ages.

Please include the X91 with all 8 stops in the valley in your future bus network.

Statement 32 – Abi Sallinger

A few weeks ago, I submitted three questions to the Transport and Connectivity Policy
Committee, of Bristol City Council.

I asked about the “traffic study” which they are quoting and using to justify their
proposals for the South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood.

But instead of providing proper replies, they simply published a non-relevant generic
response, which was also used in a number of other people’s questions, instead of
actually answering them.

Please read the following, and please investigate see if why the Council chose not to
answer these very pertinent questions.

1) SBLN: The Floow Interactive Map

The council’s SBLN webpages now have an “Interactive Map”, which states the
percentages of “Through Traffic” in various roads of the South Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood.

It can be seen at this location:

[link redacted by Democratic Services]
This was created in July 2025, by using “telematics data” gathered between September
2024 and May 2025.

The website explains:

“Vehicles telematics is data recorded by vehicles or in vehicle devices (or apps) using
GPS, sensors, and onboard systems.”

And the website says this is:

“Anonymous, aggregated vehicle data used to estimate traffic volumes on individual
roads, including the proportion of through traffic versus visiting traffic.”

While it appears the data has been provided by Floow, it is not clear who created this
map.

So please explain who created the Interactive Map, whether it was Floow, or Council
staff, or a sub-contractor, etc.

2) SBLN: Floow Map Times and Days

The Floow Interactive Map displays data for five time periods:

• Weekday AM Peak (7-10am)

• Weekday PM Peak (4-7pm)

• Weekend AM Peak (7-10am)

• Weekend Midday Period (10am-4pm)

• Weekend PM Peak (4-7pm)

But the Weekday Midday Period is missing, as are all of the overnight figures, from 7pm
to 7am. The Map gives a skewed perspective, by only showing the busier times.

So why are these time periods missing?

3) SBLN: Floow Map Definitions

When we click roads on the Interactive Map, we see a panel with statistics for various
categories, with the “Estimated Cars Per Hour” divided into “percent internal”,
“percent inbound”, “percent outbound” and “percent through traffic.”

No attempt is made to explain these words, in layman’s terms.

So, for the purposes of this map, please clearly explain exactly what is meant, by the
words Internal, Inbound, Outbound and Through Traffic.

AFTERWORD

These are the three questions which I asked.
Can you please ascertain from the Council why they failed to reply to them? The
overriding implication is that I am not being listened to.

Thank you very much for your consideration in this matter.

Statement 33 – Charlie Siret

We at Reclaim Our Buses are glad to see the Mayor has pushed the Next Stop Better
Buses survey, and is taking improving our bus services seriously. However, whilst it’s
good to know the priorities for improvements in different areas, ultimately all of the
factors identified in the survey - like reliability, seating at stops, good lighting etc. - need
fixing

In advance of the Bus Plan release this later year, we are concerned we haven’t heard of
any collaborations or consultations with residents on the structure of our bus network
(as the NSBB survey just asks about how bad the problems are, not our opinions on how
we should structure fixing them).

WECA needs to genuinely consult with the many voices in the West of England who use
the buses, and who have seriously thought about how to fix our bus network.

In these consultations, residents must be fully informed of:

• all of the possible structures for network control (EP, EP+, partial franchising, full
franchising),
• the impacts of these structures on the daily running of and use of the buses,
• the benefits and drawbacks of each structure, and
• the funding options.

We therefore ask that you release the ARUP report into franchising so that residents
know not only where their money is being spent, but what the report’s
recommendations are for the suitability of franchising in this area. This is crucial to
receive before the recommendations are filtered through WECA’s Bus Plan, for the
purposes of transparency.

WECA also needs to carry out a franchising assessment, so that we can truly learn
which franchising framework - full or partial structures - might most suit the WECA
region, and how much such a franchising scheme would cost WECA.
Statement 34 – John Emery

I live in East Harptree. I use the X91 to get in and out of Bristol for visits to the audiology
department of the BRI, to and from Temple Meads railway station, shopping, cultural
events or just a day out.

When my son is staying at the house he also uses the bus. I am retired, in reasonably
good health,and still drive (electric car), so my use of the bus is occasional but valued.
When I no longer drive, and it is not possible to predict how soon that will be, the bus
will be essential. I assume it is already essential to many people and I'm concerned on
their behalf should the service be cut. On some journeys I've made there have been
friendly conversations enhancing a sense of community. A good, reliable bus service
like the X91 is essential.

Statement 35 – Cllr Christine Townsend

The Mayor’s focus in tackling the levels of NEET young people in Bristol and the wider
WECA region was clear at the NEET event earlier this week. The audience heard the
passion and commitment to this group of young people within the Mayor’s opening
remarks, speaking to the profound and long-lasting impact on young people of
experiencing even short periods of being NEET. She emphasised that there is a need for
the whole system to support our young people to help them build and sustain the
confidence and trust needed to enable and achieve their true potential into their early
adulthood and beyond.

This statement seeks to raise some concerns I expressed privately as a member of the
Advisory Board at the relevant WECA board a few weeks ago in relation to some of the
success measures as they relate to NEET reduction within the Investment Plan
especially when considering young people aged 16-17.

These measures are outlined on page 26 and highlight success measures that include
for example seeing young people completing an apprenticeship or a degree, clearly
these are positive outcomes that will deliver NEET reduction. Such an outcome
demonstrates that a young person has sustained education, employment or training
over a number of years thus enabling them to experience success whilst considering
their next steps.

However, I do still have concerns that some success measures as currently written,
they do not recognise the status of, or responsibilities held by the local authority
towards, young people aged 16-17.

Young people completing Yr 11 are not progressing to HE, the next step of progress is
FE. The LA has a requirement in law to monitor and sustain both the Yr12 and Yr13
education, training or employment. A measure that sustains FE for 3 months is not a
success measure for this age group as, expectation for 16 and 17 years olds is to
sustain engagement across both years. The strategy needs to recognise the status of
young people aged 16-17 within the success measures, ensuring they align with LA
responsibilities toward this age group. WECA cannot have differing success measures
from their component LAs within it.

It is also difficult to understand how ‘young people intending to progress to FE/HE
destinations post-support’ is an outcome measure, it is certainly a step toward this
goal, but not an outcome in and of itself – achieving progression into FE/HE is the
outcome measure.

In summary I believe that some of the NEET outcomes need tweaking, and I would
welcome the opportunity to discuss this further.

Statement 36 – Matt Sanders

“SBLN — The Elusive Traffic Data”

* THE DEFINITION *

The Department for Transport’s “Statutory Guidance for Implementing Low Traffic
Neighbourhoods” has this definition of an LTN:

"An area-wide traffic management scheme aimed at reducing or removing through
traffic from residential areas, put in place using traffic signed restrictions or physical
measures such as planters or bollards.”

So — in order to qualify as a “Low Traffic Neighbourhood” — a scheme must include
modal filters — with the express intention being to eliminate “through traffic.”

* THE FUNDING *

Bristol City Council’s SBLN webpages (“Residential Streets”) note:

“To secure UK Government funding for this project from the West of England Mayoral
Combined Authority, our designs must include these types of measures.”

So — in order to secure funding — the Council says the SBLN has to include modal
filters.

* THE DOWNSIDE *

The downside of modal filters, is that they cause massive disruption for residents,
carers, tradesmen, taxis, utilities and deliveries — with longer journeys, social isolation,
and compromised emergency services, etc.
So — in order to JUSTIFY these unwanted side effects — there must be a significant
proven issue with through traffic.

* THE JUSTIFICATION *

Sure enough, the SBLN proposals — published in September 2025 — included 12
modal filters in the Southville Zone.

And in order to justify them, and garner public support, the Council Website (“Phase 1
Neighbourhoods: Southville”) — claims:

“Traffic data show that high numbers of vehicles from outside the area use residential
streets in Southville as a cut-through to other destinations.”

The same claim was also made in printed documents for the Public Consultation.

But what “Traffic Data” proves this claim…?

* THE EVIDENCE *

Despite being asked on countless occasions, to provide the specific “Traffic Data”
which confirmed “High Numbers”, the Council failed to comply.

And that is despite it being in their interest to do so — as any compelling “Traffic Data”
would of course justify the scheme.

In June 2024, 25 ANPR cameras were placed throughout the SBLN region, to gather
origin-destination data for thousands of vehicles. But sadly none of them were placed
in the Southville Zone, or at its main entrances or exits.

So no useful data was gathered, to demonstrate ANY quantity of through traffic in this
area, let alone “High Numbers”.

* THE ADDITIONAL DATA *

On 29th April 2026, after these issues received public attention on Bristol Live and
Bristol 24/7, and the BBC recorded a film for Politics West, the Council Website (“Key
Dates and Reports”) published two additional documents, which had not previously
been revealed.

One was a “Through Traffic Analysis” — produced by Arup, seventeen months earlier, in
November 2024.

The other was a “Through Traffic Interactive Map” utilising telematics data from “The
Floow” — produced nine months earlier, in July 2025.
If the Council genuinely believed in the credibility of these documents, it is curious that
they chose not to mention them, in response to the many public forum requests to the
Transport Committee and Full Council, asking that they state which specific “Traffic
Data” confirmed “High Numbers” of vehicles cutting through Southville…

* THE ARUP THROUGH TRAFFIC ANALYSIS *

The Arup document consists of just five pages, and appears to be an extract from a
longer document which has not been published.

The authors claim to have estimated “through traffic” levels based on the ANPR data
gathered in June 2024 — but provide no explanation for the methodology employed.
But as the ANPR cameras were not placed in any positions which could possibly detect
vehicles “cutting through” Southville, Arup’s estimates have no credibility.

The Report says: “Whilst there is some variance across the study area, at a sector level
through-traffic does not appear to make up a large proportion of all traffic.”

Their “through traffic” estimate for the Southville Sector ranges from 10% in the
morning, to 13% in the evening. Hardly the “High Numbers” claimed on the SBLN
webpage(!)

Even if modal filters were to deflect ALL of this “through traffic” elsewhere, the longer
journeys incurred by residents to circumnavigate the modal filters, would obviously
result in a net increase in the total mileage driven.

In Arup’s Nov ’24 report, their map shows the Southville Sector’s eastern perimeter
running along East Street and Bedminster Parade. But in the Council’s modal filter
proposals, published in Sept ’25, Southville’s eastern perimeter runs along Dean Lane
and St John’s Road. (Presumably this change was because East Street excludes most
vehicles, so could not be designated as the boundary road of a “liveable
neighbourhood.”)

So, in Arup’s report, Dean Lane was INSIDE the Southville Sector, so its traffic was
deemed to be “cutting through” that neighbourhood, But now, in the revised plan, it
would be considered to be legitimate traffic on a boundary road.

The Council’s ATC Data Site 70 in Dean Lane recorded approx 3,800 vehicles per day.
So that number should be deducted from Arup’s estimate for “through traffic” in
Southville.

But Arup’s estimate gave an average of 2,992 “through trips” per day — for the whole of
Southville. If we deduct the Dean Lane journeys, we end up with a negative figure of
MINUS 800 “through trips” per day!

Clearly, Arup’s Nov ’24 figures were a complete fantasy.
But even if they weren’t, they should have been recomputed, when the Southville
Sector’s boundary changed, to place Dean Lane on its perimeter.

Yet on 29th April this year, Transport officers issued a press release quoting this 17-
month-old figure of “10-13%” as the main Headline — and attributing this statement to
the Leader of the Council.

* THE FLOOW THROUGH TRAFFIC INTERACTIVE MAP *

And then we come to The Floow Interactive Map, (extrapolated from telematics data
from satnavs etc) — which shows percentages of “Through Traffic”, on individual
stretches of roads throughout the SBLN area.

On its Website, the Council quoted figures of “up to” 85% Through Traffic in Raleigh
Road, and 81% in Greenway Bush Lane.

To find these high numbers, officers carefully selected the “Weekend AM” period —
where, at the same time, different portions of the same two roads were “down to” 43%
and 54%, respectively.

So what does the Floow map actually MEAN, when it refers to “Through Traffic”…?

The only definition which is useful for or purposes, is the one used on the Council’s
webpage, to justify the SBLN’s modal filters:

“… vehicles from outside the area using residential streets in Southville as a cut-
through to other destinations.”

So are all those naughty drivers identified by the Floow data on Raleigh Road really
“cutting through” the Southville neighbourhood — from one side to the other — eg
North Street to Coronation Road…?

It ain’t necessarily so…

Bizarrely, Floow also assigns a figure of “81% Through Traffic” to a North Street side
road called Upper Sydney Street.

But Upper Sydney Street is just a short cul-de-sac — which leads to nowhere — let
alone all the way to Coronation Road! So it can’t have ANY Through Traffic!

But what it does have, is a small number of parking spaces, and a Tesco Metro on the
corner. So any car which stops here for a few minutes while the driver nips into the
shop, before leaving again, gets classed as “Through Traffic”.

Because — as has been confirmed by the Transport Chair — a short stop of less than
ten minutes does not count as a destination — so it’s classed as a continuous journey.
And so we find, that any vehicle which visits any destination in Southville, without
parking for more than ten minutes, will be classed as “Through Traffic”.

Every taxi, delivery van, recycling lorry, and parent collecting kids for the school run, will
be counted as “Through Traffic” on every street that they pass through. Yet those are all
legitimate journeys by and for residents, and nothing to do with “cutting through” the
neighbourhood.

Common sense tells us that only a tiny number of roads in Southville actually offer any
benefit to drivers wishing to “cut through” this locale. Yet countless other roads are
also assigned high percentages of “Through Traffic” — even when it’s impossible for
those roads to be used for that purpose.

The Floow algorithm ISN’T cleverly assessing whether vehicles are “cutting through” the
neighbourhood, from one side to the other.

It is using a completely different, and far more clunky definition — and then CALLING it
“Through Traffic”.

And everybody is assuming that — just because the same words are used — they are
describing the same thing.

But they are NOT.

* THROUGH TRAFFIC IN RALEIGH ROAD *

After the Public Consultation was published at the start of May — revealing
overwhelming opposition to the Southville modal filters — the Council announced that
the scheme would be simplified — but there would still be modal filters in Raleigh Road.

For the 14th May Transport Committee meeting, I therefore asked: “… please state
(with numbers) exactly WHICH “Traffic Data” the Council is relying upon, to justify
modal filters in Raleigh Road.”

This time, the Officer Response did not invoke the 2024 ANPR data. But nor did it
mention the Arup estimates, or even the Floow statistics — so perhaps officers had
already lost faith in all of that “data”.

Instead, the respondent simply stated that traffic counts showed 2,500 vehicles use
Raleigh Road each day, and wrote: “This is clearly in excess of what would be expected
on a residential road with no through traffic and indicates a degree of through traffic
despite the assertion that this cannot be assumed.”

So THIS appears to be the Council’s current thinking: 2,500 vehicles is a lot, so some of
them are bound to be Through Traffic(!)
But this is utterly inane.

Raleigh Road is an important distributor road to several residential streets, like Upton
Road, Birch Road, Hamilton Road, Leighton Road, Beauley Road, (and all their
tributaries beyond), as well as half-a-dozen carparks, including a big one for Aldi.

So of course it is busier than other residential roads. But that does not mean we should
just ASSUME a high degree of Through Traffic, without any evidence at all.

The Officer Response continued: “There are a number of other elements of the data
provided that show levels of through traffic on Raleigh Rd but this seems the simplest
way to explain it.”

But if there were “other elements”, then why were they not stated here?

This was their golden opportunity to lay out their evidence.

It was in their interest to do so.

Yet they didn’t.

* A QUESTION FOR THE HEAD OF TRANSPORT *

At this meeting, I asked a Supplementary Question about the Floow stats, to [name
redcated], the Head of City Transport — as seen at 35:00 on the meeting’s YouTube
Video.

“Do you genuinely believe that, at any time of the day, on any day of the week, the traffic
in Raleigh Road is “85% Through Traffic” — ie, traffic which is cutting through the
Southville zone, from one side to the other, without stopping for legitimate reasons? Is
THAT what those numbers mean? It is “Through Traffic”, according to the definition
which everybody else has been using, for the last five years?

[name redacted]’s response was:

“Well that’s what the explanation says, isn’t it?”

And that is all he had to say.

Statement 37 – Rosa Kell

What discussion have taken place

With the west of England mayoral combined transport Authority and North Somerset
council over the new bus service Tenders starting 26th july 2026

Passengers groups are very concerned about connectivity from Somerset in Bristol city
centre and Southmead hospital bus station and cribbs causeway bus station.
Service x91 Bristol city centre, Bristol Temple meads station, south Bristol to

Chew stoke Chew magna Bishop Sutton for work journeys and school journeys to Chew
valley school from south Bristol.

Open proposals to extend this service to Whitecroft, Farmborough. Timsbury and Bath
spa bus and coach station.

Merged with bus service 99 Chew valley local service.

Service x10 Southmead hospital bus station, Cribbs causeway bus station Portishead
Clevedon Dial Hill and Yatton Railway station.

Possible to Wrington

We very concerned about the loss of the link to Bristol Southmead hospital bus station
and Bristol cribbs causeway bus station from North Somerset.

Service Bristol to Winsford. P1

Services k 1 keynsham Town service with connection from Bristol city centre to Arnos
vale Bristlington keynsham service 43 .

Along with services 25 south Bristol to lockleaze uwe bus and coach station via Bristol
city centre st Paul's st werburges.

We are very concerned about these services.

and proposals from 376 ,375 ,374 Bristol bus and coach station Bristol Temple meads,
Totterdown ,Knowle Hengrove Whitchurch , Pensford Clutton Farringdon Gurney
Chewton Mendip Wells bus and coach station and Glastonbury and street to Yeovil bus
and coach station 376 and service 375 Bridgwater bus and coach station.

374 to Bridgwater bus and coach station

With the Electricitifcation of the city Region bus network with the bus and coach Depots
and in weston super mare Somerset, Bath Somerset Bristol Lawrence hill
Electricitifcation under construction and Bristol Hengrove completed.

What discussion are going with the west of England mayoral combined transport
Authority and North Somerset and Banes and Somerset council about the
Electricitifcation of keynsham and Wells bus Depots and stagecoach Red and white
services Depot in Patchway Bristol

Which are Depots for service in south Bristol, Bristol and Bath .

The UK Government Department for Transport deadline is for target for Electrification by
2030 2035 .

This will improved clean Air Quality in Bristol and impove the Carbon footprint.
Wells Depot services operate 171 173 174 from Bath spa bus and coach station to
Peasdown st john, Radstock Westfield midsomer Norton paulton Shepton mallet Wells
bus and coach and via 173 Chilcompton

So Wells is a Depot that services the west of England mayoral combined transport
Authority and North Somerset council on service 126 weston super mare bus and
coach station to wells Bus and coach station via cheddar.

Keynsham service 43 42 Kingswood to Bristol city centre to Bristol Temple meads
station, Arnos vale Bristlington keynsham and keynsham bus Depot

43 needs to go around the estate in the Evenings

Service 17 keynsham bus Depot keynsham Town centre, keynsham Railway station,
Hanham Kingswood Hilfields Staple Hill Fishponds Eastville park Ashley Down station
Southmead hospital bus station.

Buses at Wells and keynsham bus Depot are currently 14 years oid .

We are also very concerned about equlities training on stagecoach South West with a
wheelchair passengers being asked to climb up the stairs on the coach and not being
able to use the accessible seats on Falcon coaches services Scottish City link
megabus operated by Stagecoach South west.

On Bristol Bond Street, Bristol Airport Churchill East Brent Bridgwater Taunton
Wellington Cullompton Exeter Newton Abbot and Plymouth coach station.

The incident happened between Bristol Airport and Wellington.

What discussion have the mayor and the west of England mayoral combined transport
Authority and North Somerset council had about equlities training with stagecoach
Group and Rmt bus drivers union .

When is bus forum being set up North Somerset council have a meeting at the campus
in worle Weston super mare Somerset.

But their no date for a west of England mayoral combined Authority forum

Or setting up an access panel.

With Somerset unitary Council With Bridgwater Town having put in a expression of
interest to Franchise Somerset bus network but as that network is linked to North
Somerset council, Banes and Bristol .

What discussion are not going with the west of England mayoral combined transport
Authority and North Somerset council to Franchise the bus network.

Simon Lightwood mp buses and coaches minster. Has asked Somerset council to apply
to the Department to Franchise the bus network
Statement 38 – Phil Collins

I am Dr Phil Collins and I am also speaking on behalf of Chew Valley Sustainable
Transport Group.

Colleagues have very ably described the importance of the X91 to the Chew Valley.

I want to use my statement to briefly remind the committee of the real people involved
and impacted by this service.

The Government defines community engagement as “the active process where public
bodies involve residents and community groups in reviewing, designing, and influencing
public services and local decisions.”

I’m going to briefly look first at the residents and then the community group.

There’s a student in East Harptree who is using the bus to study at Boomsatsuma in
Bristol.

A gentleman in Compton Martin who commutes every day and got rid of his car because
he realised he could rely on the X91 to get him to work.

A retired lady from Ubley who travels into her nearest supermarket in Bedminster and is
therefore able to carry her shopping home without changing buses.

A group of friends who regularly travel back late from Bristol on Saturday as they’re able
to have a drink.

These are just a very few examples and, actually, all of these are in villages that will lose
their direct connection to Bristol in your plans.

In addition there are several people who now can’t get the bus in Chew Magna because
it doesn’t stop there after recent changes made by WECA in April’s direct tendering of
the route. There are two that used to use the X91 to regularly get to the eye hospital.
And an elderly couple who used the X91 most days for shopping and to visit family in
Bristol, but now have to rely on lifts.

These are real people getting impacted by the decisions being made.

The other part of community engagement is with local community groups. The Chew
Valley Sustainable Transport Group comprises a small number of skilled and dedicated
people tirelessly working to bring better bus services to the Valley. Many of you will
know by now how active this group is and what strong credentials it has with direct links
into, and feedback from, the broad community of the Chew Valley.
We are not bus experts but have learnt a lot during our active participation in the
WESTlocal partnership: designing, developing and running the X91. Everything we do
has always had a foundation in real data and has always been pragmatic.

It is one of the strongest community groups I’ve known and yet, during this latest
process has virtually been ignored.

It may feel that a group like ours is just a collection of rather idealistic people trying to
‘do good’ and that your professionals and consultants know more. In truth our local
knowledge enhances your understanding of what is needed, if you will let it.

Now, to finish, I know your jobs are difficult ones. There’s always more that is
demanded of you than can be delivered. But sometimes there are decisions that can
be made that successfully address local needs, where the need is proven and
quantified, and that fit within the affordability envelope.

Supporting the X91 unchanged and within the network scheme we have proposed for
the people of the Chew Valley is, I believe, one of those.

Statement 39 – David Redgewell

with the setting up of the new council and the need to work more closely together with
the west of England mayoral combined transport Authority

and North Somerset council with through this year will become a full member subject
to parliamentary approval and approval by the secretary of state for Housing
Communitys and local government Steve Reed

With the Transport and connectivity committee we are concern whist The Transport
Authority by a order in parliament is the of England mayoral combined transport
Authority

Passengers groups and community's are very concerned about the lack of Discussion
or working party on the 26 th July 2026 new bus services in the city Region.

The issue was raised at south Gloucestershire county council disability advisory forum
as well on Tuesday 2nd June 2026

We are very concerned that proposals were made for new bus routes in the city Region
in Bristol.

Without the Transport and connectivity committee sub committee involvement

The proposals from new or oid Bristol corporation bus route 25 now being
Proposed to Run from south Bristol to Bristol city centre, Broadmead shopping centre,
Haymaket St Paul's st werburges Eastville park to lockleaze and uwe bus and coach
station.

Whilst councillors in Frome valley both Labour and Green Party

Are working with the community and West of England mayoral combined transport
Authority mayor Helen Goodwin to ask here to sort out

Route 50 Bristol city centre to Broadmead shopping centre Haymaket oid market,
Bristol Stapleton road Station Eastville Stapleton village

Frenchay .

Which not has a deep rural bus services Stapleton and Frenchay may by villages and
they are both in the historic county of Gloucestershire but the no longer a deep rural
area .

We have 2 option for urgent action the option for the Tender for 25 bus to operate,
Bristol city centre to st Paul's st werburges Eastville park Blackberry Hill To Fishponds
or to uwe Bus station.

and sort out service 19 Bath spa bus and coach station to weston. Kelston Swinford,
Bitton oidland Common Warmley Kingswood Staple Hill Downend Bromley Heath
Frenchay Stapleton Stoke park,uwe bus and coach station and Bristol Parkway.

Evening services are required.

So it is very important the Frenchay Stapleton village parts of Eastville park

don't become a bus Desert.

We welcome service 40 .

Avonmouth Dock Lawrence weston, Henbury and cribbs causeway bus station.

Service x91 Bristol city centre , south Bristol to the Chew valley Chew magna Chew
stoke Bishop Sutton, with a option to Extention to Bath spa Farmborough and
Timsburys

But Paulton, Midsomer Norton westfield Radstock need to be included.

Services Yc2c Cribbs causeway bus station Bristol zoo Olverton Alverston Thornbury
Tytherington and yate bus station.

The link to Bristol zoo be good Extention to Southmead hospital bus station.would be
welcome by

Passengers groups.
The other important link is the Y8 from yate Park and ride site Yate railway station yate
bus station chipping Sodbury Wickwar Charfield Wotton under Edge Stroud Merry Walk
bus corridor option

This service is very important to the community in Wotton under Edge Charfield
Wickwar Hawkesbury Upton chipping Sodbury to Yate bus and coach station yate
Railway station.

Links into services y1, y2, y6 Bristol bus and coach station to Winterbourne Frampton
Cotterell,

Y 6 via Gloucester road montpellier station approach Horfield Common Southmead
hospital bus station Cribbs causeway bus station.

Theses services are supported by the west of England mayoral combined transport
Authority

X10

Bristol Southmead hospital bus station Cribbs causeway bus station to Portishead and
clevedon via Dial Hill and Yatton Railway station and on to Wrington from September
2026 .

P1 Bristol city centre to Winsford.

Keynsham Town service.

K1

534 Fishponds to East Bristol.

All these bus service are out for tender now execpt x10 for September 2026

768 Bath city centre to Radstock via camerton

522 Bristol bus and coach station, Bristol Temple meads station, Bristlington,
keynsham Timsbury Paulton Midsomer Norton westfield Radstock Peasdown st john
Bath spa bus and coach station.

All theses routes have options .

In the Tenders but need urgent attention to make sure we have the right bus routes
operating in the city Region from 26 th July 2026 .

Communitys bus and public Transport user groups are very worried about access to
schools college's University's Hospital health care facilities and basis shopping

Sorting the bus Network is very important whilst their been consultation on the Mayor
bus plan .
Many oider and disabled passengers failed to get copies of the Bus consultation plan
hard copies in libraries in North Somerset council, Banes ,south Gloucestershire
county council and Bristol city council.

A lot of people travel from library to including the central library in Bristol and Bath
Kingswood libraries and found no paper copies.

We need push on with Henbury loop railway, Ashton Gate station and light rail to the
Airport and south Bristol.

The Avonmouth Dock to Henbury Bristol Brabazon line to Bristol Parkway and Filton
Abbey wood station, with link to seven Beach is a top priority if the new

Town around North Bristol is allowed by the UK government with set up of mayoral
Development corporation.

Along with Pilning station having more services.

We are very concerned about the Department for Transport using its contractor First
group plc Greater Western trains company limited GWR

To block the Carmarthen, Swansea High, Cardiff Central Newport Monmouthshire
seven Tunnel junction Pilning Patchway Bristol Parkway Filton Abbey wood Ashley
Down station Bristol station road Bristol Lawrence hill, Bristol Temple meads station.

2 hourly Transport for Wales Welsh government service from December 2026 stop on
revenue extraction grown to UK Treasury.

This will also effect the already licenced from December 2027 .

Carmarthen, Swansea, Cardiff Central Newport Monmouthshire seven Tunnel junction
Bristol Parkway London Paddington service by lumo First Group plc Trains with options
on extension to Hereford and Paignton via Bristol Temple meads station.

Theses Railway issue need sorting out by the west of England mayoral combined
transport Authority mayor Helen Goodwin Railway Executive and western Gateway
Transport Board with the Welsh government.

And respect the equlities act 20 10 and protected characteristics and Disability
discrimination act 1993 in all Transport decisions. around metro west railway

We still have none accessible trains for passengers with reduced mobility Inter city
Express trains on Bristol Temple meads station, Bristol Lawrence hill Bristol Stapleton
road Station Ashley Down Filton Abbey wood extension to Filton North Brabazon and
Henbury

This route being operated by trains if the Ist class carriage is off the platform then the
train is not accessible to wheelchair users, and passengers with reduced mobility.
Bristol Lawrence hill and Bristol Stapleton road are not fully accessible requiring lifts to
Bristol platform at Bristol Lawrence hill and Bristol Stapleton road Station. Between the
platforms

The same problem exists on the Bristol Temple meads station, Filton Abbey wood
station, Bristol Parkway, Yate Charfield for Wotton under Edge, new station, cam and
Dursley Gloucester central Cheltenham spa Ashchurch for Tewkesbury Worcester
Shrub Hill Worcester Forgate Street metro west railway Network services

When IET trains are used passengers with reduced mobility and partly sighted
passengers wheelchairs users

Can not get off the trains or Board the Trains only in First class carriage at Filton Abbey
wood station, Yate cam and Dursley and Ashchurch for Tewkesbury.

I the standard class end they sit in their wheelchair chairs in the corridor.

First Group plc Greater Western trains company limited GWR could removed the seats
in second class end but so far the Department for Transport has not allowed this in the
contact.

So a derogatory is use for metro west Railways local services .

Cheltenham spa, Worcester Shrub Hill have not wheelchair accessible lifts in place still
along with Stroud.

The scheme were stopped by the Department for Transport.

Worcester Shrub Hill by the new Reform Party run council stop all west Midlands
Railways Executive funding for Railway improvement in Worcestershire.

Network bus services improvement and pavements and public realm.

Improvement to the Ferry services in the Harbour and to st Anne's.

The Ferry services in Bath spa Bath watertaxis and Bristol Harbourside and Temple
meads/ Temple Quarter

Need discussion with Mayor Helen Goodwin and her team to look at investment in the
Ferry Terminal ferry with wheelchair accessible Electricitifcation of the Ferry network
and access to to Ferry terminals

For passengers with reduced mobility wheelchairs users and partly sighted passengers
especially at Bristol Temple meads station Bristol Quarter and the university the public
Transport team and the Mayor Bristol Temple meads station/ Temple Quay team have
not had a discussion with the Ferry Boat company's or the cross Harbour ferry services
in Bristol.
Bus lanes prority measures and bus gate are important to keep great Bristol moving
theses are very slow progress

In Bath and North East Somerset On A367 Bath spa Bus and coach station to peasdown
st john Radstock Westfield midsomer Norton paulton/ Wells corridor or the Bristol bus
and coach station Bristol Temple meads station corridor beyond, whitchurch village.

Through Pensford Clutton Farringdon Gurney Chewton Mendip towards Wells bus and
coach station.

We welcome progress on the Bristol City centre to Bradley stoke and Thornbury corridor
and, Bristol city centre to Yate bus station.

In south Gloucestershire

and work on 370 Bristol city centre to long Ashton, Worle weston super mare bus and
coach station interchange

Bristol to Hotwells Ashton Gate pill and Portishead,

Works on the Bristol bus and coach to Harbourside,Hotwells, Portway to the park and
ride and Avonmouth.

Work to Bristol city centre to Henbury and cribbs causeway route .

Bristol city centre to Bristol Temple meads station and whitchurch.

and works to Broadmead to make the bus and coach lane to union street and the city
centre.

Transport hubs at worle, Nalisea, clevedon, Portishead, Pill uphill weston hospital,

But urgent need see bus stop shelter

Passengers information lighting wheelchair accessible spaces seating help points
castle kerbs and Drop kerbs

Across Bristol city council, Banes and South Gloucestershire county council.

For First Group plc bus services and stagecoach west red and white and south west,

National express coaches,

But the Broadmead shopping centre plan need more discussion at west of England
mayoral combined transport Authority and North Somerset council bus advisory Board
and panel.

West of England mayoral combined transport Authority and North Somerset council
bus passengers and public Transport Forum when it meets.

and access groups .
We welcome the mayor plan for Hick gate involving Banes, Bristol city council and
south Gloucestershire county council.

Especially with bus priority measures through Bristol Temple meads station, Arnos vale,
keynsham saltford Newbridge Weston Bath spa bus and coach station, and relation of
Bristlington park and ride to Hick gate.

the need for south west plan around

Withywood and yarnley .

Involvement of west of England mayoral combined transport Authority North Somerset
council and Bristol city council .

We need a Severnside plan for Portishead Avonmouth seven Beach and Pilling with bus
coach and Railway infrastructure, Bristol Temple meads to pill and Portishead line
including at station at Ashton Gate.

Bristol Temple Meads to Avonmouth Dock and seven Beach line .

Cardiff Central, Newport Monmouthshire seven Tunnel junction Pilning station and
Patchway line to Bristol Parkway and Bristol Temple meads station

Avonmouth Dock to Henbury Bristol Brabazon Filton Abbey wood and Bristol Parkway
line .

Light rail system need to address on theses plans and Bus services improvements

With First group plc Greater Western trains company limited GWR DFT railway from the
13th of December 2026 .

On Intercity railway we still need the UK government Departments for Transport to
release extra trains units stored at Derby works for Arriva 1sq capital service cross
country train.

Between Plymouth North Road Exeter St Davids Taunton and west super mare, Bristol
Temple meads, Bristol Parkway Cheltenham spa Birmingham new to Manchester
piccadilly, Leeds Newcastle upon Tyne Edinburgh Waverley Aberdeen.

Where passengers are standing all the way whist extra Rolling stock sits in sidings 6
units at Derby works

This need raising with secretary of state for Transport Hydi Alexander mp and lord Peter
Hendy Railways minister

The new Bristol Temple meads station, Bath spa, Chippenham Swindon Oxford local
railway services is welcomed.
We hope that stakeholders and passengers groups will be invited to the opening
ceremony for Bristol Filton North Bristol Brabazon station.

Not just railway officials YTL and councillors

Statement 40 – Jo Sergeant

How buses could improve quality of life for everyone in the West of England

We at Reclaim Our Buses very much welcome the expansion of the free fares for
children scheme. It is encouraging to see the uptick in bus use and the potential for
greater independence and opportunity for the region’s young people.

What concerns us is that there are parts of the region that will not see these benefits
and these are often where they are most needed. These are often more remote parts of
the West of England, in which buses are far less frequent, bus stops are further away
from people’s homes and the lack of integration has a greater impact.

Aside from our usual call for a better model of bus service management - i.e.
franchising, Reclaim Our Buses recommend enhancing free buses for children with
improvements to services in the shorter term that could see real benefits for those
living in ‘transport deserts’, such as:

• Free fares for children on supported bus services at other times, not just in the
school holidays. That way, they can get to main bus routes and pay just the £1
fare, like other children who live in the better served areas.

• Free or cheaper fares for parents/carers accompanying younger children during
school holidays.

• ‘Youth culture vouchers’ (as used in Spain) in more rural communities and/or
areas of higher deprivation, which could be used to access different experiences
around the region. (not strictly a transport improvement but would provide an
additional incentive to take the bus when it doesn’t feel easy to do so)

In addition, there is a strong case for changing some of the supported services so that
they run shorter ‘shuttle’ type routes between transport ‘hubs’. This would improve their
reliability and frequency.

In my statement to Scrutiny earlier this week, I commented on the £500 million that is
being allocated for the Draft Local Transport Delivery Plan and wondered how much of
that will be spent on private consultants. If some of this money could be spent on
implementing the above improvements, the benefits would be felt by many residents
within months, rather than years or decades.
In the longer term, a move to greater control over our buses would deliver many of the
aspirations set out in the WECA Vision and would be well worth the investment.

Statement 41 – Cllr Fiona Gourley

As we get to a new era, with a new supported bus network in North East Somerset about
to go live, I want to reflect on the process, and the positive outcomes that I believe will
benefit residents.

Since I was elected three years ago, I have observed a transformation of the
relationship between WECA and the three Unitary Authorities, particularly around my
remit of rural buses in B&NES.

The past was marred by significant rural bus cuts, limited consultation with UAs, and
the imposition of schemes such as the Birthday Buses which very largely benefited
urban residents; Westlink which was mostly a disaster in B&NES; and Westlocal, which
was unfair to the volunteers who worked extremely hard to run their bus service, and
unfair to the communities who couldn’t participate because they did not have those
volunteers. B&NES officers and councillors had limited opportunities to change or
improve the schemes to benefit more residents. As a result, communities were
stranded, residents were frustrated and angry, and in B&NES we ended up with a
patchwork, not a network of supported services. It was not a happy situation for many
B&NES residents.

However, things are changing. Under the present regime WECA is undoubtedly working
better with UAs. Councillors’ voices, on behalf of residents are being heard, alongside
the Mayor.

WECA officers have worked collaboratively and creatively with B&NES officers and
members to design a new rural bus network in North East Somerset. We have listened
to councillors, campaigners and residents, as well as using connectivity data, to plan
new routes which we hope will meet our residents’ needs better – to get to education,
work, healthcare, shopping and leisure. It should be more equitable, with fewer
stranded communities, more frequent services and better timetables, connecting rural
communities to Bath, Bristol, MSN/ Radstock, and Keynsham.

Westlink has been retained, albeit with a new operator and a better contract that allows
fixed route/fixed timetable services to get children to school and people to work, and to
fill in the gaps, where there are no regular buses, to deliver people to mainline routes &
hubs and back. I really hope that it works better than before.

Once the tenders have been contracted and routes fixed, WECA and B&NES need to
sort out anomalies such as bus stops. It is odd that in some places such as Tunley and
Chew Magna, there is a perfectly good stop on one side of the road and none on the
other. Safety rules have tightened and bus companies are saying they cannot stop.
WECA, B&NES and the bus operators need to find sensible solutions.

WECA also needs to iron out Westlink anomalies such as being unable to order one
from small villages which are close to larger communities and main bus routes but with
no pavement, the lanes are unwalkable.

In the future, there needs to be a better mechanism for consultation and to listen to
input from even more councillors, campaigners and residents. So, when the biannual
bus change periods come round, WECA would have a better idea of what changes are
being requested, such as tweaked routes and timetables. WECA’s Bus Plan
consultation has shown it can be done.

One campaigner has suggested that WECA has a “Fix My Bus” button on their website
or TravelWest app. It would be a great way for WECA to track issues with specific bus
routes or operators and very useful for passengers.

The financial reality is with a cut in bus funding from government, we have had to do
more with less. Therefore, it is a real achievement to have created a new rural bus
network that could be better than what went before. The proof will be when residents
learn about the new routes and start to use the buses from 1 August.

Statement 42 – Caroline Dunn

I wish to draw everyone’s attention to a very useful and good report written by Jessica
Brake and produced by BDEF earlier this year ( 48pp) . While it is a report on a
consultation with disabled people in connection with the SBLN proposed by BCC ,
much of what it says is highly relevant not only to the deficiencies and disasters of the
now notorious EBLN , but to a consideration of transport issues and disabled people
generally.

It is very well put and very clearly written and I feel it should be essential reading for
anyone involved in transport region wide as there is much that can be considered
universal , especially the problems with the current political love of what is called
active travel , and this political fashionable concept always mentions “walking wheeling
and cycling”. This is because of the attitudes and lack of understanding of the lived
experience of being a disabled person when people in power are hellbent on getting rid
of the car and equally oblivious to how ugly their planters are , how parklets remove
parking spaces for us as at Barton Hill Settlement , and how dangerous so called livable
neighbourhoods are with not just the restriction of emergency vehicle access but also
their impact on disabled people.
As I have asked before and elsewhere , how many people need to die before sensible
changes are made .

Although it was a consultation on a future SBLN , almost all of it could be demonstrably
applied to the appalling and callous scheme that has been perpetrated on some of
Bristol’s most deprived and disadvantaged residents in east bristol . The worries,
anxieties and perceived problems and deficiencies expressed in it , are highly relevant
to all the disabled people in the EBLN area. If you add in an RPZ the place will
become unlivable in practical terms for people struggling with impairments and health
conditions . You cannot wave these problems away with dispensations for blue badge
holders , for many disabled people are not - another thing the report points out .

And disabled people do not choose cars as a lifestyle choice but as an essential . The
report also mentions this statement of the obvious , but is amazes me how many
people do not realise this.

As this report is based on the information and experiences of many disabled people and
not just my own , I feel I cannot do better than quote a few salient pieces from it . I
strongly encourage you all to go away and read the whole thing whether working in
transport or not. It may help you if you don’t have personal experience of the all-
engulfing problems that come with having an impairment / health condition to
understand our realities when it comes to words such as “freedom” and “
independence” of those that do . Even those of us who can get out feel very isolated ,
frequently , and often trapped in a prison instead of a house. The more we can spread
understanding and compassion for what is actually a large proportion of the population
which I feel reading this report will do , the better.

One thing I will say myself are that the BCC changes generally citywide have cost me a
lot in terms of car repairs and extra petrol , meant greatly longer journeys to places and
reduced my ability to access some . We still have no disabled bays in the centre ; the
bristol beacon

; m shed ; arnolfini , and getting to the old part of town. The current plan to remove
vehicle traffic from the horsefair will prevent my being able to access broadmead or
places like sparks , at all ! I have said all this , but it seems they just don’t want people
like me to be able to go there - they do not care .

As people will probably know I am always concerned about safety and parking. So my
quotes from Jessica’s Report are lifted from sections on those .

These are from pages 11 and 12 :

“Residents felt that proposals to reallocate car parking spaces for bike hangars,
planters, and parklets prioritised the travel choices and needs of non-Disabled
residents at the expense of Disabled people who rely on cars as an essential mode of
travel. Participants highlighted that for many cars are not a lifestyle choice but a
necessity, enabling them to travel independently and allowing family members, friends,
and carers to visit them in their homes. Reduced parking availability was linked to
increased isolation, particularly for people who are housebound or have limited
mobility. “

“The push in proposals for the reduction of parking spaces in favour of bike hangars to
further encourage cycling also does not account for the fact that many Disabled people
cannot use a standard two wheeled bicycle. The cost of specialist equipment for active
travel can present steep financial barriers for Disabled people, with adaptive
nonstandard cycle options being substantially more expensive, ranging from £500 to
over £3000[8]. This means that despite its environmental benefits, active travel is not a
viable option for many Disabled people who either cannot afford the specialist
equipment, or who prefer other modes of transport due to health issues. “

There is also the cost which I am all too aware of myself :

“Proposals that aim to remove parking spaces to discourage car use also fail to
consider the cost of specialist equipment for active travel when it comes to walking and
wheeling. Many Disabled people do not have access to mobility aids that are
sufficiently high quality or appropriately suited to their individual needs to allow travel
on foot or by wheelchair. “

There is so much that I wish to quote from the part on safety , I would be lifting the
whole section , but this is from pp20 and into 21 :

“Proposals for outdoor café seating, parklets, bollards, and planters were described as
potentially obstructive and intimidating, particularly for wheelchair users, people using
mobility aids, visually impaired residents, and those with sensory sensitivities.
Participants felt these changes could narrow pavements, create cluttered routes, and
make navigating public spaces more stressful or unsafe.”

“Being forced to park further from home or walk longer distances, often in poorly

lit or quieter streets, was seen as increasing vulnerability, especially for Disabled
people, older residents, and women. Participants noted fears of harassment, assault,
and reduced personal safety at night, raising concerns that the proposals could conflict
with existing commitments to women’s safety and inclusive public spaces. These fears
were framed within a broader context of rising hostility toward Disabled people.”

With many thanks to Jessica Brake , BDEF , and all who participated in the BDEF
consultation .
How many more excellent statements of the obvious problems , how many more easily
readable reports will we have to give people ? Before they start listening to us ?

And doing something ABOUT IT .

Statement 43 – Alexandraa Veitch

Objection to the South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood (SBLN) Proposals

Many Southville residents struggle to understand how the current SBLN proposals will
achieve their stated objectives. The programme presented a valuable opportunity to
create a genuinely greener, more sustainable community that would gradually reduce
reliance on private vehicles. However, many residents believe that the current
proposals are fundamentally flawed, would have significant unintended consequences
for the community, and could seriously harm independent businesses on North Street
and surrounding areas.

Throughout this process, Bristol City Council (BCC) has failed to demonstrate three
essential elements of successful transport planning:

- Robust and transparent evidence gathering capable of supporting the conclusions
being drawn.

- Meaningful engagement with Southville residents.

- Integration of improved public transport into the proposed scheme.

Previous SBLN proposals were withdrawn because they failed to withstand public and
technical scrutiny. While the revised proposals have been scaled back, they still do not
adequately address the underlying challenge of helping residents become less
dependent on private cars.

Public Transport: The Missing Foundation

The most significant weakness of the SBLN proposals is the lack of meaningful
improvements to public transport.

The Liveable Neighbourhood guidance states that schemes should support public
transport and improve connections to bus stops, rail stations and other services,
making it easier for people to choose those modes instead of driving. Yet public
transport appears to be absent from the current proposals.

The increase in car ownership across Southville since the 1990s is closely linked to the
reduction of local bus services and the failure to provide viable alternatives. When I
moved to Raleigh Road in 1992, residents benefited from a range of direct and
affordable bus services connecting Southville to other parts of Bristol. The City Dart
services, in particular, were frequent, convenient and widely used, serving stops on
Dean Lane, Beauley Road and Raleigh Road.

As these services were progressively withdrawn, residents naturally became more
reliant on private vehicles. Today, many public transport journeys involve multiple
connections and significantly longer travel times, making them impractical for everyday
use.

The closure of Vauxhall Bridge since 2023 has further highlighted shortcomings in
public transport connectivity. Although residents may technically be able to access the
M2 route via Cumberland Road, there is no conveniently located bus stop adjacent to
the bridge to facilitate easy access.

There is also concern that some SBLN measures could worsen bus reliability. By
concentrating additional traffic on North Street, journey times for the number 24 bus
service may increase, making public transport less attractive rather than more
attractive.

Encouraging walking and cycling is an important objective. However, these options are
not suitable for everyone or every journey. Elderly residents, disabled residents and
those with caring responsibilities must also be considered within any realistic transport
strategy.

Concerns Regarding Data and Evidence

Before approving the SBLN proposals, I urge WECA to carefully scrutinise the evidence
used by BCC to justify the scheme.

In particular:

Whether data collection methods relating to traffic volumes, air quality and vehicle
speeds were sufficiently robust and representative.

Whether monitoring periods were of adequate duration and conducted at appropriate
times.

Whether the statistics used to support the proposals are presented transparently and
with clear sourcing.

A significant amount of data has been collected. However, when statistics are quoted
publicly, the source data is often not referenced, making independent verification
difficult.

For example, a figure of 2,500 vehicles per day on Raleigh Road has been cited publicly.
As a long-term resident of Raleigh Road, I find it difficult to reconcile this figure with
normal daily conditions. If the statistic was recorded during an atypical period, such as
a football match day, this should be clearly stated. Otherwise, there is a risk that
isolated data points may be used to support predetermined conclusions.

For public confidence to be maintained, all data should be presented transparently,
with sufficient context to allow meaningful scrutiny.

Public Consultation

Many residents do not believe that the consultation process has been fit for purpose.

Questions submitted to meetings of the Transport and Connectivity Committee have
frequently received generic responses that fail to address the specific issues raised.
This has created a perception that concerns are being acknowledged procedurally but
not substantively addressed.

When residents completed the 2024 consultation questionnaire, many expected
proposals focused on practical improvements such as safer crossings, parking
management, traffic calming measures and potentially enhanced bus services. Few
anticipated a scheme of the scale ultimately proposed.

One of the most significant concerns remains parking provision. While many residents
accept that reducing dependence on private vehicles is a legitimate long-term
objective, removing substantial numbers of parking spaces before improving public
transport risks leaving many residents isolated and without realistic alternatives.

Concerns regarding transparency have been further reinforced by the handling of
Freedom of Information requests. Of three requests I submitted, only one was fulfilled.
Requests relating to parking space removals and publication of raw consultation data
were refused. Other residents have reported similar experiences.

These issues contribute to a broader perception that the consultation process has
lacked openness and transparency.

Addressing Problems Created by Previous Policy Decisions

Many residents feel that the SBLN seeks to address problems that have, at least in part,
arisen from previous policy decisions.

Examples include:

The reduction of local bus services, which increased reliance on private vehicles.

Partial closures and restrictions on routes such as Cumberland Road and Dean Lane,
which have redirected traffic onto narrower residential streets.

Claims regarding insufficient tree coverage despite existing tree provision on North
Street, alongside proposals that may reduce parking availability and adversely affect
independent businesses.
Residents also deserve clarity regarding the substantial allocation of funding for tree
planting and the extent to which this expenditure is directly linked to the objectives of
the SBLN programme and not fulfilling council obligations to replant due to felling trees
outside Southville.

Conclusion

Southville residents are not opposed to environmental improvement, safer streets or
reduced car dependency. On the contrary, many support these objectives. However,
successful change requires credible alternatives, robust evidence and genuine public
engagement.

Many residents feel they are not receiving clear answers to legitimate questions and
that key decisions have been made without sufficient transparency. The result is a
widespread lack of confidence in the proposals and in the process by which they have
been developed.

For these reasons, I respectfully urge WECA to reject the current SBLN proposals
unless and until Bristol City Council can demonstrate that the scheme is supported by
robust evidence, meaningful consultation and a credible strategy for improving public
transport.

Only then can Southville move towards a greener future in a way that commands the
confidence and support of the community it is intended to serve.

Statement 44 – Chris & Anca Roberts

Following a time-limited review, having not received any direct communication
(surprisingly, given our immediate proximity to such a large scale development) of the
masterplan(s) document proposing development of approximately 2,500-3,050 homes
on former Greenbelt land opposite [address redacted], please note our comments
below:

Undoubtedly it has been raised before and, it would appear, a hurdle that has been
overcome, we find it hugely disappointing and upsetting that there is an intent to create
urban sprawl on land which was formally protected against precisely that. Greenbelt.

In addition, choosing a location that would feed out onto an already hugely congested
corridor does not seem to make any sense whatsoever. Common sense would dictate
that infrastructure would need to come first. It seems there is an argument that has
been put forward suggesting measures will be put in place which will convince people
to not have car ownership and not to drive. If this is the belief then it is pure fantasy in
our opinion.
We also note that the layout proposes an “urban corridor” with high density 4 storey
buildings directly opposite LFM, along the A4 itself. Developing a high-density urban
corridor directly opposite an isolated, Grade II listed historic lodge surrounded by open
countryside must surely be one of the most sensitive challenges in planning. The
presence of this specific heritage asset must completely change the approach: a
uniform, hard-edged street wall built almost right up to the pavement would completely
crush the lodge's rural setting, block its countryside views, and we would hope, trigger
severe objections from historic preservation bodies like Historic England.

If the development were to proceed, however, there are some potential positives that
we believe could be made to the A4. These really ought to be considered regardless, but
relate primarily to access and safety.

The A4 between the current park and ride and Hicks Gate roundabout, as mentioned
above, is severely congested. Furthermore, many drivers have a tendency to speed
when the road is less busy, in many cases excessively and easily topping 70mph. This
makes entering and leaving adjoining roads, e.g. LFM, Ironmould Lane, the old garden
centre, etc. particularly difficult and potentially extremely dangerous. Many drivers also
attempt to make dangerous, if not illegal, right turns. There have been numerous
accidents witnessed at these points, and also where the road narrows outside LFM
vehicles have often collided with the concrete bollards.

In order to control these points of access, we do not agree with the implementation of
numerous traffic light controlled junctions. These would simply add to the already
atrocious congestion.

A much more sensible approach would be to install non-light controlled roundabouts.
One at the iron mould lane/former garden centre entrance, and a second, particularly if
the development goes ahead, at the site entrance, which could potentially become a
new entrance for LFM, giving the ability to turn safely out towards both Bristol and Bath.
Of course, this would need to be discussed also with St. Brendan’s sixth form college,
but potentially they could also benefit from having rear access for maintenance
vehicles, such as for landscaping.

The introduction of roundabouts would naturally limit the ability for people to speed.
They would also give drivers the option to alter their direction of travel. For example,
many turn left out of the garden centre and use our entrance to turn and head back
towards Bath, while other dangerously turn right both in and out of the former garden
centre. Another example is that many vehicles will also cut across lanes out of LFM and
Ironmould lane and turn right towards Bristol as they do not wish to travel all the way
down to Hicks Gate roundabout to then join the congestion.

An added advantage of implementing these two roundabouts would be that the need
for a marked right turn lane into LFM would be removed, creating more space for a
potential second lane towards Bath where it currently narrows down to one lane, a
notorious bottleneck.

Another A4 suggestion to limit speeding would be the installation of average speed
cameras and the speed set to either 30mph or 40mph, as deemed appropriate, for the
entire length. There is the occasional mobile camera down towards the roundabout,
but seems that its effectiveness is limited.

Statement 45 – Satyen Joshi

Back in October 2025, the Bristol City Council (BCC) started the SBLN Consultation and
mapped out a timeline to break up Southville into zones using modal filters. Many
including myself were surprised at how WECA was influenced by BCC Highways to
release development funding for the SBLN proposal without any evidence of baseline
data from BCC.

The assertion of rampant rat running across Southville (an area where most residents
walk and cycle) and allegations of numerous needless short car trips by residents,
thereby increasing pollution and compromising road safety was not something that was
evident within the desolate day-time Southville streets. So one wonders what particular
evidence BCC used to draw down development funds from WECA.

Nevertheless, BCC ploughed on, and detailed plans were shared by BCC at a series of
consultation meetings. The plans were striking in their lack of basic common sense and
felt like fitting a square peg in a round hole. If implemented, the Southville SBLN
proposal would have increased pollution and traffic on boundary roads, increased
journey times, increased risk of accidents and discriminated against several protected
groups, especially the elderly. Tension in the Southville community grew from the tone-
deaf attitude adopted by BCC.

We kept being told by BCC that WECA sets the rules for funding the Liveable
Neighbourhood schemes and that BCC had to include zones and modal filters for a full
valid business case. (Yet at the WECA Overview and Scrutiny Committee of 1 June
2026, an officer response to a question asked stated, that there was no single Traffic
Management measure used when a LTN was assessed for funding purposes. So who is
right and what will WECA actually be funding? Let's park this for a moment, although
this is a non-trivial point and move on...)

At least 4500 residents subsequently took part in the SBLN survey and BCC started
analysing the results from November 2025. A change.org petition currently standing at
3350 signatures had also been launched, asking BCC to stop SBLN proceedings in
Southville.
In response to claims of no baseline traffic data, BCC Highways initiated a large traffic
survey study in December 2025, the results of which would presumably be used in
future if a liveable neighbourhood scheme was implemented to monitor efficacy.

By February 2026, BCC claimed that they were still going through the survey responses.
Four months into analysing survey consultation feedback, there must have been some
sense of the direction as to how the results were shaping up. So inspite of a protest
march by several concerned residents and businesses to City Hall asking for SBLN
proceedings in Southville to be paused, the BCC Transport and Connectivity
Committee were asked to vote for further funds up to a total combined expenditure of
circa £2.1 million pounds to create a paper business case for debate sometime in
Autumn 2026, prior to submission to WECA.

The vote to increase initial funding by £1.3 million was narrowly carried through, but
questions will remain as to why the T&C Committee were asked to vote for further funds
at a time when it was arguably conceivable that the SBLN Consultation Survey results
were not shaping up as BCC expected. Fast forward to May 2026 and the SBLN Survey
results are published Lo and behold, as many expected, the Southville residents
overwhelmingly (>70%) rejected the BCC proposed traffic interventions specifically the
Modal Filters/Bus gates/Cameras/Coloured Zones.

More than 85% of business owners surveyed on North Street were also against any
SBLN implementation in Southville due to the negative impact on trade. Take a moment
to let these numbers sink in. (70% against for Residents and over 85% for local
businesses).

This should have been the final nail in the coffin and the end of SBLN proceedings in
Southville, given that this entire sorry episode was fishing for a problem that did not
exist ( as most Southville residents are champions of active travel anyway).

Instead, news was released via an interview on BBC Bristol, that the Head of BCC
Transport was still committed to a liveable Neighbourhood in Southville and that modal
filters/zones would still be a feature of an amended scheme, albeit not at the same
level as before.

I am at a loss to understand why the democratic wishes of the Southville community
are being ignored. It may be unpalatable and I appreciate that the results of the
consultation go against the grain of the ideology of the ruling party, but Bristol is a
democratic city and employing an attitude of defiance to keep pursuing programs that
are deeply unpopular is not aligned with principles of good governance.
It is a sobering thought that Brexit was implemented on a slim 52% majority vote. So
when over 70% Southville residents reject being given a label of zones/Modal filters/Bus
gates etc, they expect and demand BCC to listen.

The Labour MP for Bristol South Karin Smyth has written to the Head of BCC Transport
asking for a stop to any modal filter driven liveable neighbourhood scheme in
Southville.

I sincerely hope members of this Joint Committee will take note of the same and stop
BCC Highways from sending business cases for the SBLN that involves Southville to
WECA. Let's invest public funds in better transport links, and repair/maintenance of
roads and pavements in South Bristol

Statement 46 – Dan Ackroyd

It looks really terrible that the deadline for submissions for the intern program is closing
a mere three days after requests for submissions was announced.

While three days may meet the legal minimum for "open" advertising of the program, it
is not reasonable for people to both decide to, and apply for a position that has a large
time commitment.

Very short application periods raise suspicions that the insiders have already lined up
the people they want to apply, to have their applications ready to go.

Hopefully this is short application time is due to a lack of planning rather than anything
else. But if half of the intake turn out to be young Labour activists, would anyone be
truly shocked?

In the advert for the interns, the mayor says that WECA is looking for people with
energy. I would have thought you'd be looking for autists who are fanatic about public
transport.

There are two ongoing issues that this combined authority is turning a blind-eye to:

1. Ghost buses - where the buses just don't turn up despite the electronic display board
giving the impression that a bus is arriving soon.

2. The First Bus app apparently has usability issues, which has resulted in people
denied boarding to buses. I've seen multiple individual reports of this on Reddit, which
suggests this is affecting non-trivial number of users.

The interns programme apparently requires people to be in full-time education; except
for that requirement, I would apply.
People need to be able to rely on a bus to take them to work. That WECA hasn't tackled
these two problems suggests it is not a serious organisation.

It seems pretty clear that the political team behind the Mayor are trying to replicate the
"Manchester Miracle" of "a politician being popular". Mr Burnham succeeded due to the
combined authority being run very effectively.

I do not see anything that suggests WECA is being run any more effectively than it was
under Mayor Norris. The only change I can see is an incredible amount of self-
promotion of the Mayor, and the Labour Party.

And while a "Crackdown on hidden childcare fees" is good news, using WECA
resources to pump out Government PR is misuse of WECA resources.

[link redacted by Democratic Services]

Please sort the basic stuff out first.

This much propaganda, while WECA is ignoring the fundamentals, is not a recipe for
success.

Statement 47 – Zoie Kennedy

This is a statement to put forward concerns regarding the huge proposed development
around Hicks Gate.

1. As a resident of [address redacted by Democratic Services] I am hugely concerned
about the heritage aspect- there seems to be no report completed to assess this.
Views, light pollution, traffic pollution.

2. Lack of affordable housing in the plan - seems to be profit over community.

3. Traffic. Our kids already have to cross the A4 outside [address redacted by
Democratic Services] to get to the bus stop for school every morning, despite there
being no crossing and traffic zipping up the inside to the park and ride, making it
dangerous even when the main traffic is at standstill (which it frequently is). This road is
already unfit for the volume of traffic, with everything at a standstill for most of the day
around the industrial development by tkmaxx. There is already a development being
completed there, plus another in Salford, which is going to make it crazy. Add another
1-3k homes to an already congested area and it’s going to be gridlock and pollution
heavy. It already takes us 15 minutes in the morning when turning left out of Longfox to
get round the roundabout and back to where we started when heading into Bristol.
There should be a proper crossing and right turn added if the road is being improved
4. We have lived at [address redacted by Democratic Services] for three years and it
took over a year to find a place at a doctor surgery that would take us. Despite me
phoning round all the local Dentists every couple of months we still have not found
Dentists for either ourselves or our children. If a development of any size is being
considered, it should absolutely come with medical and dental provision. It is
untenable to think that this amount of new residence would simply be soaked up into
the current system, which is already a nightmare.

I hope these things are carefully considered and that the scale and nature of the
development takes these into account.
