Equality Impact Assessment [version 2.12]
Title: Workplace Parking Levy – Stage One Development and Outline Business Case
☒ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☐ New
☐ Other [please state] ☒ Already exists / review ☐ Changing
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Laura Gosling
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Transport Programme
Manager

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of an Equality Impact Assessment is to assist decision makers in understanding the impact of proposals
as part of their duties under the Equality Act 2010. Detailed guidance to support completion can be found here
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com).
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the process by someone with a good knowledge of the
proposal and service area, and sufficient influence over the proposal. It is good practice to take a team approach to
completing the equality impact assessment. Please contact the Equality and Inclusion Team early for advice and
feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Describe who it is aimed at and the intended aims /
outcomes. Where known also summarise the key actions you plan to undertake. Please use plain English, avoiding
jargon and acronyms. Equality Impact Assessments are viewed by a wide range of people including decision-makers
and the wider public.
The Committee Report outlines Bristol City Council’s proposed approach to developing a Workplace Parking Levy
(WPL) scheme and associated Outline Business Case.

A WPL is an annual charge paid to the Local Transport Authority by employers on the workplace parking spaces
they provide. Employers have the option to pass this cost on to their employees or pay the charge themselves.
The aim is to encourage employers to manage the number of workplace parking spaces they provide, whilst
promoting and encouraging the use of sustainable transport

A WPL forms a potential part of Bristol City Council’s transport strategy and is outlined in Joint Local Transport
Plan 4 and the Bristol Transport Strategy as a key demand management measure aimed at tackling congestion,
particularly at peak times, and as a means of providing significant additional revenue for transport improvements
across the city. The introduction of a WPL would help discourage commuting by car and help increase the use of
alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public transport which would in turn, improve people’s health and
the local environment. A WPL would also provide significant additional revenue for transport improvements
across the city.

The powers to introduce a Workplace Parking Levy are contained in the Transport Act 2000. By law, net proceeds
from a Workplace Parking Levy are only available for the purpose of directly or indirectly facilitating achievement
of local transport policies and objectives.

Further information about the Workplace Parking Levy can be found here: Further information - Bristol Workplace
Parking Levy

OFFICIAL
1.2 Who will the proposal have the potential to affect?
☒ Bristol City Council workforce ☒ Service users ☒ The wider community
☒ Commissioned services ☒ City partners / Stakeholder organisations
Additional comments:

1.3 Will the proposal have an equality impact?
Could the proposal affect access levels of representation or participation in a service, or does it have the potential to
change e.g. quality of life: health, education, or standard of living etc.?
If ‘No’ explain why you are sure there will be no equality impact, then skip steps 2-4 and request review by Equality
and Inclusion Team.
If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment, or if you plan to complete the assessment at a later stage please state
this clearly here and request review by the Equality and Inclusion Team.

☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

Step 2: What information do we have?

2.1 What data or evidence is there which tells us who is, or could be affected?
Please use this section to demonstrate an understanding of who could be affected by the proposal. Include general
population data where appropriate, and information about people who will be affected with particular reference to
protected and other relevant characteristics: How we measure equality and diversity (bristol.gov.uk)
Use one row for each evidence source and say which characteristic(s) it relates to. You can include a mix of
qualitative and quantitative data e.g. from national or local research, available data or previous consultations and
engagement activities.
Outline whether there is any over or under representation of equality groups within relevant services - don't forget
to benchmark to the local population where appropriate. Links to available data and reports are here Data, statistics
and intelligence (sharepoint.com). See also: Bristol Open Data (Quality of Life, Census etc.); Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA); Ward Statistical Profiles.

For workforce / management of change proposals you will need to look at the diversity of the affected teams using
available evidence such as HR Analytics: Power BI Reports (sharepoint.com) which shows the diversity profile of
council teams and service areas. Identify any over or under-representation compared with Bristol economically
active citizens for different characteristics. Additional sources of useful workforce evidence include the Employee
Staff Survey Report and Stress Risk Assessment

Data / Evidence Summary of what this tells us
Source
[Include a reference
where known]
Bristol City Council The study undertaken by Atkins in 2011 provided high level estimates of the number of
WPL Feasibility parking spaces that could be encompassed in a WPL scheme based three different defined
Report (2011) areas in Bristol. These range from a lower estimate of 8,600 parking spaces for a smaller
central zone to an upper estimate of 57,000 for a scheme covering the entire city. The
WPL Feasibility Study undertaken by Nottingham City Council in 2021 notes that without

OFFICIAL
Data / Evidence Summary of what this tells us
Source
[Include a reference
where known]
undertaking a more detailed and up to date audit of spaces, the accuracy of these figures
is likely to be low.
70.8% of respondents think that air quality and traffic pollution is a problem locally which
Bristol Quality of suggests that there is majority support for initiatives that seek to reduce the impacts of car
Life Survey use in the city.
2024/25
83% of people think that traffic congestion is a problem locally which suggests broad
support for measures that reduce levels of traffic in the city. In the previous years’ survey
this percentage was lower, suggesting local people feel congestion has got worse since
2023.

20.2% of people walk or cycle to work and 14.1% of people take the bus to work which
shows that there is a significant proportion of the population who would benefit from
improvement and investment in active travel and public transport infrastructure.

34.4% of respondents state that they drive to work which suggests, depending on the
coverage of the WPL scheme, that a significant number of people would be impacted by
the proposal.

The Quality of Life survey suggests older people (65 years and older) (28.3%), younger
people (16 to 24 years) (19.1%), Disabled people (27.4%), LGB+ (23.1%) and Trans people
(11.5%) are less likely to drive to work than the Bristol average (34.4%). Carers (42.3%) and
parents (46.4%) are significantly more likely than Bristol average (36.7%) to drive to work.
Those living in the 10% most deprived areas are slightly more likely to drive to work
(37.9%) than the Bristol average.

There are also significant disparities in the extent to which people in Bristol find lack of
transport options prevents them leaving their house when they want to - in particular for
young people, Disabled people, Black Asian and minoritised communities, LGBTQ+, carers
and those living in the most deprived areas.
Age UK: The Future Driving remains the most common form of transport for older people in the UK, with 68%
of Transport in an of households where someone is aged 70+ having their own car.
Ageing Society,
2015
NOMIS Bristol has approximately 18,330 registered businesses with a higher proportion of small
Nomis - Official (10 to 49 employees) and large (250+ employees) employers than the South West regional
Census and Labour average. More work is required to understand the allocation of parking spaces across
Market Statistics these businesses as it is likely that many (particularly among micro and small businesses)
(nomisweb.co.uk) will have no allocated parking and therefore will not be impacted by the scheme.

Travel to Work Bristol’s Travel to Work Survey results reveal that 31% of employees travel to work by car
Survey Bristol, (with an additional 6% car sharing). On average, people driving to work travel in 3.2 days
March 2025 per week and travel an average distance of 35 miles a day. The latter statistic
demonstrates that many commuters are travelling into Bristol from outside of the local
authority boundary and that the WPL will have impacts beyond Bristol.

The survey notes that there is a relatively equal split between men (30%) and women
(32%) who drive to work. (It should be noted that the percentages don’t add up to 100%
because of the option ‘Prefer not to say’)

In line with the Quality of Life Survey, the Travel to Work Survey highlights that people 50+
(39%) are more likely to drive to work than younger people under 30 (21%).

OFFICIAL
Data / Evidence Summary of what this tells us
Source
[Include a reference
where known]

The survey identifies that people driving to work are more likely to be from a white ethnic
background (33%) than an ethnic minority group (24%)

Unlike the Quality of Life Survey, the Travel to Work Survey suggests that an almost equal
proportion of Disabled (32%) and non-Disabled people (31%) travel to work by car.

Bristol Walking and The Bristol Walking and Cycling Index, which is updated every 2 years, polls a
Cycling Index representative example of Bristol’s population (circa 1,000 respondents). The survey
(2023) reveals data that would support the aims and objectives of a WPL scheme:

• 49% of people want to walk, wheel or cycle more
• 35% of people want to take public transport more
• 29% of people want to drive less

In addition to the report notes that 64% of people want more investment in walking and
wheeling, 58% more investment in cycling, 83% more investment in public transport and
only 23% more investment in driving.

Global Traffic In 2025, congestion cost the UK economy £11 billion and cost the driver £822.
Scorecard | INRIX
Global Traffic Bristol drivers lost an average of 64 hours each year to congestion, making the city the
Rankings second most congested in the UK, after London (91 hours) and ahead of Leeds (59 hours)
and Manchester (62 hours). This congestion cost the city £191 million and the driver £881
in 2025.
Bristol traffic In 2025, average congestion level was at 51.3%, 3 percentage points higher than in 2024,
report | indicating worsening traffic conditions. During the morning rush hour, this rose to 88.5%
TomTom Traffic and in the evening rush hour, this rose to 87.7%. The average travel time for a 6 mile
Index journey was 25 minutes and 45 seconds, which was 34 seconds more than in 2024. Over
the year, drivers spent 191 hours, or 7 days and 23 hours, in rush hour traffic, which is 4
hours 6 minutes more than in 2024.
Additional comments:

2.2 Do you currently monitor relevant activity by the following protected characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☒ Gender Reassignment
☒ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☒ Pregnancy/Maternity ☒ Race
☒ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☒ Sexual Orientation

2.3 Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
Where there are gaps in the evidence, or you don’t have enough information about some equality groups, include an
equality action to find out in section 4.2 below. This doesn’t mean that you can’t complete the assessment without
the information, but you need to follow up the action and if necessary, review the assessment later. If you are
unable to fill in the gaps, then state this clearly with a justification.
For workforce related proposals all relevant characteristics may not be included in HR diversity reporting (e.g.
pregnancy/maternity). For smaller teams diversity data may be redacted. A high proportion of not known/not
disclosed may require an action to address under-reporting.

A lot of relevant data exists on the commuting habits of Bristol’s residents, but the following gaps remain:

OFFICIAL
• Whether different groups currently pay for parking or are offered free parking at their workplace.
• An accurate picture of the number of employee parking bays that may form part of the scheme.
• The ability of employers and employees to meet additional costs.

2.4 How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
You will nearly always need to involve and consult with internal and external stakeholders during your assessment.
The extent of the engagement will depend on the nature of the proposal or change. This should usually include
individuals and groups representing different relevant protected characteristics. Please include details of any
completed engagement and consultation and how representative this had been of Bristol’s diverse communities.
Include the main findings of any engagement and consultation in Section 2.1 above.

If you are managing a workforce change process or restructure please refer to Managing a change process or
restructure (sharepoint.com) for advice on consulting with employees etc. Relevant stakeholders for engagement
about workforce changes may include e.g. staff-led groups and trades unions as well as affected staff.

A Feasibility Study has been undertaken in relation to the WPL scheme. However, this outlines in detail the key
stakeholders that need to be involved and sets out a recommended approach to consulting with them.

Businesses/employers have been engaged with the development of the WPL. A survey was shared with
approximately 570 workplaces, including schools and colleges, between November 2025 and January 2026,
disseminated through the Business Improvement District (BID), Visit West and Business West. Parking data has
been collected through door-knocking and telephone surveys for a further 30 businesses. Around 120 responses
have been collected to gauge, amongst other things, what Bristol’s businesses would like to see WPL revenue
invested in, in the city’s transport system. BCC has also held webinars for employers to ask questions about the
WPL.

Further engagement and consultation is planned as part of the development of this OBC.

2.5 How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
Explain how you will continue to engage with stakeholders throughout the course of planning and delivery. Please
describe where more engagement and consultation is required and set out how you intend to undertake it. Include
any targeted work to seek the views of under-represented groups. If you do not intend to undertake it, please set
out your justification. You can ask the Equality and Inclusion Team for help in targeting particular groups.
The scheme has been subject to an initial Feasibility Study which outlines a Stakeholder Management Strategy for
future stages of project development. This highlights the need for extensive public consultation as well as
delivering a communications plan which sets out how key stakeholders (e.g. employers) will be kept updated and
informed at key stages of the project. The next stage of development will advance the stakeholder strategy and
communication plan, and any scheme will be subject to public consultation and committee sign off before
delivery.

Further engagement with workplaces/businesses will take place in April/May 2026.

Step 3: Who might the proposal impact?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered above and the characteristics protected by the Equality Act 2010.
Also include details of existing issues for particular groups that you are aware of and are seeking to address or
mitigate through this proposal. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying potential impacts etc.
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com)

OFFICIAL
3.1 Does the proposal have any potentially adverse impacts on people based on their
protected or other relevant characteristics?
Consider sub-categories and how people with combined characteristics (e.g. young women) might have particular
needs or experience particular kinds of disadvantage.
Where mitigations indicate a follow-on action, include this in the ‘Action Plan’ Section 4.2 below.
GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many groups)
The introduction of a WPL will have a range of impacts for different protected characteristic groups but the full
details of these impacts will not be clear until the necessary development work has been undertaken to
understand the size, scope and pricing strategy of the scheme. Therefore, this EQIA will need to be continuously
reviewed and updated as the project progresses.
A final decision on any WPL scheme will need to be taken by Committee at which point an updated EQIA will be
provided.
The WPL scheme is still at an early stage of development with key details such as pricing, scope and potential
exemptions not yet determined. As such, this EQIA is proportional to the level of detail currently available.
The analysis of the data suggests there is high levels of support for measures that improve conditions for walking,
cycling and public transport and for securing more investment for these modes. Residents want to drive less and
walk, cycle, and use public transport more.
Where certain equality groups may rely more on driving to work due to accessibility or safety barriers on public
transport, this impact may be partially mitigated through investment in public transport infrastructure
improvements.
The scheme is likely to have an impact on a significant number of commuters who drive to work and of that group
it is not unreasonable to suggest that people on lower incomes will likely find it harder to meet additional costs if
their employer passes the cost of the WPL scheme on to them.
The analysis finds that older people make up a greater proportion of people who travel to work by car and
therefore they are more likely to be impacted by the scheme than other groups.
Whilst a levy would be for the employer not the employee, there is a strong possibility that charges would be
passed on directly to employees or the overall number of car parking spaces reduced - so impacts below have
been assessed on that basis.
Disabled people who hold Blue Badges are likely to be exempt, but Disabled employees without a badge and
those with mobility needs could still be affected if parking is reduced. Night and shift workers, who often rely on
cars due to limited public transport at unsocial hours, may also face disproportionate impacts.
In the council’s cumulative equality impact assessment for the 2025-26 Budget, we recognise that increased
charges and levies could disproportionately affect small businesses and the local voluntary and community sector.
This impact is especially significant for organisations led by or supporting equality groups, as higher costs may
prevent smaller providers from continuing to offer equitable services to Bristol’s diverse population. As part of the
feasibility study, we will evaluate potential indirect impacts on specific users and assess whether discretionary
concessions for voluntary and community sector or equality-led stakeholders are appropriate and feasible.
A previous scoping study identified that concessions could be made for specific groups, such as blue badge
holders, small businesses, and NHS facilities etc.
Analysis at this stage is limited to consideration of the direct impact of a levy on employees and has not
considered any potential additional pressure on on-street parking, as the levy would apply to the parking space
itself rather than the vehicle. The project plan includes a study to identify any potential displaced commuter
parking.

PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Younger people are less likely to be reliant on a car to get to work. The reduction in
congestion and re-investment of fees into improved public transport options will

OFFICIAL
provide a disproportionate benefit to this group. Improved access to transport schemes
and initiatives will help ensure this group have a good start in life.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Age: Older People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: This group is more likely to be driven to work and as such is likely to be
disproportionately impacted by the proposal if employers decide to pass on costs to
them. That said, the Quality-of-Life survey 2024/25 shows that the number of people
from the 50+ age group that state that they ‘find it difficult to manage financially’ is
much lower than the Bristol average.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: A WPL scheme could potentially have an adverse impact on Disabled employees who
need a car in order to maintain a quality of life and access to employment. A WPL could
also adversely impact a Disabled person who may need to incorporate other tasks into
their commute to work (trip chaining) such as attending necessary appointments in
order to maintain their health.
Mitigations: Consider exception for all Disabled Employees. The Blue Badge scheme may offer
partial mitigations for those Disabled employees who have them, and some employers
may already have designated spaces for Disabled People.
Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Women are statistically more likely to hold caring responsibilities for children and older
adults and would therefore be disproportionately affected if they need to incorporate
other tasks into their commute to work (trip chaining) such as the school run, caring for
or helping with tasks for older adults.
In Bristol there are more Disabled women than men.
Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
employees with caring responsibilities.
Sexual orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Quality of Life survey data suggests a higher than average proportion of LGBTQ+ people
in Bristol find lack of transport options prevents them leaving their house when they
want to.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Pregnancy / Maternity Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: As above, those with caring responsibilities may need to incorporate other tasks into
the commute to work (trip chaining) Pregnant employees may be more dependent on
having their own transport for pre-natal appointments or if they find public transport
inaccessible
Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
pregnant employees.
Gender reassignment Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: Quality of Life survey data suggests a higher than average proportion of LGBTQ+ people
in Bristol find lack of transport options prevents them leaving their house when they
want to.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic households in the UK are more likely to be in deep
poverty and experience higher levels of material deprivation. As such, if employers pass
on WPL scheme costs to these groups they may find it harder to meet these additional
costs.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Religion or Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Belief
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:

OFFICIAL
Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
civil partnership
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS
Socio-Economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: The Quality-of-Life Survey suggests that people living in areas of deprivation are slightly
more likely to drive to work than the city average. If employers pass on WPL scheme
costs to these groups they may find it harder to meet these additional costs
Mitigations: See general comments above
Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: As above – those who hold caring responsibilities for children and older adults may
therefore be disproportionately affected if they need to incorporate other tasks into
their commute to work (trip chaining)
Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
employees with caring responsibilities.
Care experienced Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: There is no data to suggest any kind of disproportionate impact on those with this
protected characteristic.
Mitigations:
Other groups [Please add additional rows below to detail the impact for any other relevant groups as appropriate e.g.
asylum seekers and refugees; care experienced; homelessness; armed forces personnel and veterans]
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:

3.2 Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their protected or other
relevant characteristics?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our Public Sector Equality Duty to:
 Eliminate unlawful discrimination for a protected group
 Advance equality of opportunity between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t
 Foster good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t

How people move around the city is intrinsically linked to equality and inclusion. We know that many
protected characteristic groups are more likely to suffer the negative impacts of car use, such as
congestion, poor air quality, traffic accidents and unhealthy physical environments, whilst at the same
time having more limited access and use of vehicles. In addition, we know that these groups are much
more reliant on walking and public transport as a means of accessing work, education, training, and
services. (Transport and inequality: An evidence review for the Department for Transport, NatCen,
2019).

This proposal is in line with the Bristol Transport Strategy that seeks to rebalance the transport system
to ensure that car use is priced fairly compared with walking, cycling and public transport. Cars take up a
disproportionate amount of space on public highway which limits the use of that space for more
investment in sustainable modes of transport (e.g. bike and bus lanes and wider pavements). The
introduction of a WPL has benefits associated with a reduction in car use and a subsequent increase in
the use of alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public transport. By increasing the tariffs
associated with car ownership we may be able to encourage people to re-evaluate the need to own a

OFFICIAL
vehicle. A reduction in the number of car trips will have a beneficial impact on air quality. In turn this will
have a positive impact on people’s health.

Step 4: Impact

4.1 How has the equality impact assessment informed or changed the proposal?
What are the main conclusions of this assessment? Use this section to provide an overview of your findings. This
summary can be included in decision pathway reports etc.
If you have identified any significant negative impacts which cannot be mitigated, provide a justification showing
how the proposal is proportionate, necessary, and appropriate despite this.
Summary of significant negative impacts and how they can be mitigated or justified:
Depending on how the scheme is designed the EQIA at this stage has highlighted that there are impacts on various
groups that need to be considered during the development of the business case. This includes potential
disproportionate impacts on Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic groups, older people (50+) and people in social
deprivation.
Summary of positive impacts / opportunities to promote the Public Sector Equality Duty:
Depending on how the scheme is designed there are likely to be a number of benefits for different protected
characteristic groups who often negative impacts of car use – such as congestion, poor air quality, traffic accidents
and unhealthy physical environments, whilst at the same time having more limited access and use of vehicles.

The WPL revenue will be ring-fenced for investment in public transport, walking, and cycling infrastructure, which
can improve accessibility for groups with lower car ownership (e.g., younger people, some older adults, Disabled
people without Blue Badges, and low-income households).

4.2 Action Plan
Use this section to set out any actions you have identified to improve data, mitigate issues, or maximise
opportunities etc. If an action is to meet the needs of a particular protected group please specify this.
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale
To review and update the EQIA through the development of the Laura Gosling Review quarterly
business case and/or key project
milestones

4.3 How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
How will you know if you have been successful? Once the activity has been implemented this equality impact
assessment should be periodically reviewed to make sure your changes have been effective your approach is still
appropriate.
A monitoring and evaluation strategy will be developed for the WPL scheme as part of the proposed business
case.

Step 5: Review
The Equality and Inclusion Team need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your EqIA. EqIAs
should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers on the equalities

OFFICIAL
impact of the proposal. Please seek feedback and review from the Equality and Inclusion Team before requesting
sign off from your Director 1.
Equality and Inclusion Team Review: Director Sign-Off:
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

On behalf of A
Hearn
Date: 25/02/2026 Date: 25 February 2026

1
Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.

OFFICIAL
