2012-2022

A decade of inspiring
growth in our city
Nottingham’s Workplace Parking Levy
10 Year Impact Report 2
-202
12
2 0

2- 2 022
201
We have invested over £1 billion in
sustainable transport in 10 years

2
A word from Councillor Audra Wynter
The Workplace Parking Levy celebrates its 10th The WPL has inspired a step-change in action on Using Nottingham’s model as an example, a WPL
birthday this year and it has offered an excellent climate change. It has motivated us all to be more scheme is now cited as part of the solution to tackle
chance to look at the fantastic things it has achieved environmentally conscious by looking at our travel climate change by organisations such as Ashden,
and the wider investment that has made Nottingham needs and their impact on our fellow citizens. the Association for Public Service Excellence,
a leader in sustainable transport. It’s exciting to see how our partners, businesses Friends of the Earth, the Chartered Institute of
and citizens have adopted greener transport. The Logistics and Transport, UK:100 and the Urban
Working in partnership with sustainable transport
WPL tackles transport emissions head-on and will Transport Group, influencing policy decisions across
operators, we have revolutionised how people travel
contribute to Nottingham achieving carbon neutrality the World.
around Nottingham and connected our residents
by 2028.
with jobs, education and healthcare. Thank you for being part of this innovative scheme
Of course, we are still recovering from the effects and if this is what we have achieved in the first ten
From a seedling of an idea that set out to tackle
of the global pandemic. COVID-19 had a significant years, imagine the difference we can make for our
congestion growth in the city, the WPL has now
impact on transport across the world and future generations in the years to come.
transformed into a core part of the transport
Nottingham was no exception; however, we have a
landscape in Nottingham. It has served as a catalyst Councillor Audra Wynter
firm foundation for commuters to return to the city
for change, inspiring pioneering transport solutions Portfolio Holder for Highways, Transport and Parks
in a green way. While all transport usage has been
and we’re proud of how our local businesses have
affected due to the changes in how people work,
risen to the challenge to affect change - from NCT’s
shop and relax, our excellent infrastructure remains,
biogas buses to Nottingham Trent University’s
and we are already seeing increases in passenger
pedestrianisation of Shakespeare Street.
numbers as we slowly get back to day-to-day life.
The first of its kind in Europe, the scheme has raised
Nottingham has more combined bus and tram users
almost £90 million, which has been re-invested into
than any UK city outside of London, and for this, we
sustainable transport across the city. It has also
would like to extend our gratitude to the businesses
allowed us to secure inward investment of over £1
of Nottingham – you have embraced our scheme
billion in transport, including £570 million for the
and enabled our city to flourish while ensuring that
tram network, £120 million for low and zero emission
people now have easier access to essential services,
buses and £60 million to transform Nottingham
such as hospitals, colleges, universities and more.
Station into a 21st century multi-modal interchange.

3
Our story
The challenge
In 2007, we were faced with the ever-growing issue of
congestion and we knew we had to act to enable our city to
grow sustainably. Economic growth was high on our agenda,
along with evolving our city to meet the needs of businesses
and local people. We had strong ambitions and strategically we
needed to implement an innovative solution to deliver our vision.
We wanted to attract new business and increase employment
while also reducing congestion growth. Feedback from our
existing businesses told us that they needed a public transport
system that would help them develop available talent pools and
support their own ambitions.

We also knew that:
> Congestion was costing the local economy £160 million a year
- half of that a cost on businesses
> Congestion was forecast to rise by 15% by 2021 and continue
to rise thereafter
> Majority of vehicles on the road were from outside Nottingham
> Nottingham’s public transport infrastructure was outdated
> Every year in Nottingham over 400 people die and many more
report health issues linked to poor air quality

4
WPL has raised almost

£90 million
in 10 years

67% of new
businesses
chose Nottingham due to
good transport links

The solution The evolution
The Workplace Parking Levy was the first of its The WPL provided a great head start for made public transport more accessible to
kind in Europe. Our council transformed how green transport options in Nottingham, but the city’s suburbs, opening employment
we invest in our transport network, making it fit we recognised that we had to go further. opportunities for 730,000 people.
for the future. Fortunately, we have a strong network of
Over the last 10 years, 2,600 new companies
partners who are as dedicated as we are
Our programme looks beyond congestion; it is have been created in Nottingham and 67% of
to achieving sustainable transport options
a sustainable solution that makes Nottingham businesses which relocated here said that good
which improve connectivity across the region
a better place to live and work, improves air transport links were a factor in their decision.
and we have worked together to build on the
quality, successfully attracts inward investment, Although our economy was greatly impacted by
foundations given to us by the WPL.
and enables the growth of our economy. the COVID-19 pandemic, having a robust, long-
Through significant investment from local term transport strategy has helped us continue
It has helped regenerate neighbourhoods,
businesses, transport providers, Nottingham our development plans, provide continued great
link socially disadvantaged communities with
City Council, Central Government and Europe, service across our public transport network and
training and job opportunities, reduce harmful
we have implemented innovative solutions such encourage economic recovery.
emissions and improve our green credentials.
as a wide range of electric vehicles, a biogas
We have connected the people of Nottingham We continue to strive to make our public
bus fleet and a zero-emission vehicle lane.
with healthcare, education and employment transport greener and even more accessible,
Together we have reduced CO2 emissions by
by working together with our partners and ensuring Nottingham is a better place to live,
58% since 2005. In addition, we have
encouraging changes which benefit everyone. work and play.

5
WPL: a snapshot
Reduced congestion

£1 million
growth by
Over
in grants
47% £120m
given to local businesses invested into into
for sustainable transport our bus network
improvements

Added 17km £55m
of track improving our city’s cycling
and active travel facilities
to turn a tram line into a network Transformed Nottingham
which connects the city Station into a
21st century
multi-modal
interchange,
creating a hub for
transport in the city

6
Building a
sustainable
economy
The excellent transport
In 10 years, we have... links made Nottingham
the ideal location for our
new business. Clients
Generated annual
Seen a are able to use the bus,
savings of
26% growth tram and train network to
£15.4m in new businesses
meet us and discuss their
for the city and
investment opportunities
£7.7m and the accessibility has
directly for
businesses broadened the talent pool
when we recruit.
Ironclad Investments
Seen unemployment
rates fall by
Contributed
to an increase
in employment by
6.3%
20.8%
7
A green legacy
We are proud to say that our holistic approach to the climate crisis; 29 electric buses
including ground-breaking transport solutions from our council and and have secured funding for a
partner companies, has resulted in a further 78 vehicles

reduction in carbon
emissions of 58% 9 park and
Together, we have: ride sites
across Nottinghamshire,
A reduction in air quality providing 6,500 free parking
pollutants means a spaces and connectivity to
clean air zone is our bus and tram networks

no longer needed
1,000
Our 120 strong biogas bus fleet
has seen a reduction of almost
eScooters
available to rent in the city
8,000 tonnes
of CO2
We have also introduced a
try before you buy leasing
scheme for electric taxis,
Car free streets accessible charge points,
for 11 schools in financial support for domestic
Nottingham charge points and a wireless
charging electric taxi trial

8
The bigger picture:

CN28
The Workplace Parking Levy has helped our organisation
get around easier, quicker and more sustainably. We
secured a grant for an e-cargo bike which has now cycled
hundreds of miles within Nottingham - bringing low carbon
support to businesses through our environmental charity.
We responded to the climate and
Through the early parts of covid, this little vehicle even helped
environmental crisis by setting an ambition
some companies to stay open. Amazing. to become the first carbon neutral city in
In addition, we have been able to help hundreds of other the UK by 2028. In keeping with our proud
businesses reduce their carbon emissions. The positive tradition of climate leadership, our carbon
neutral charter sets out a vision for sustainable
impact of WPL has been tremendous. Greener, cleaner
carbon neutrality on behalf of the Council
transport within the city. Thank you.
and the city’s Green Partnership. At the heart
Ridewise of this shared vision is an approach that not
only positively addresses wider environmental
challenges but improves quality of life and
builds a new form of clean growth for our
economy through a green industrial revolution.

The CN28 plan covers four main areas:
carbon reduction, carbon removal, resilience
& adaption and ecology & biodiversity. The
251-point plan aims to bring the businesses
and residents of the city together to achieve
carbon neutrality, delivering further benefits
such as better air quality, improved health and
wellbeing, building a sustainable economy,
growth in job opportunities and much more.

9
Sustainable transport solutions
In the last 10 years, together, we have achieved:

New Creation of a multi-modal
Peak annual state-of-the-art smart ticketing
and contactless
demand of over central bus station
payment system

58 million World’s Replaced over half of the

passenger journeys largest fleet Council’s fleet with
of biogas buses with 120 zero emission
on our bus network double-decker buses vehicles
Comprehensive One of the largest fleets of
real-time electric buses in Europe with
public transport 38 electric buses, saving
information
1,050 tonnes
of CO2
18km
of bus lanes
make taking the bus a green 2km of new bus
and efficient travel option for
both commuting and leisure
lane and traffic
light priority
on all bus corridors

10
Our Meadows and
Aspley centres are
right on bus routes,
having access to the
massive bus network
means we get parents
bringing their children
from all over Nottingham
which has really helped
our business grow.
Nottingham City
Gymnastics Club

11
Connecting people in
our city

Nottingham’s tram network
has grown from a single tram
line into a network with
17km more track
which serves over
1,800 workplaces
12
Peak of Directly serves the cities
20 million journeys two universities
per year across the network and numerous schools
and colleges
Secured
£800 million
Only tram network of inward investment
in Europe that directly 20 of the largest 30 employers for the tram network
serves a city within 800m
hospital of a tram stop

13
Making public transport
more accessible

Nottingham Station serves Nottingham Station

over 6 million > Construction of the new south concourse building,
including lifts and escalators, enabled an intermodal
customers per year transport link with the tram network
> Redevelopment of the station directly employed
1,500 people from the local area
> More accessible links to London with commuters
able to be in the capital in under two hours
> An extra platform serving London with more trains
per hour
> The station now houses additional retailers, providing
direct and indirect employment for local people

14
Cycling in Nottingham
> 24-hour citywide bike share solution
Over the last few years,
> Cycle lanes situated along major roads and
the tram network for connected mobility
we have seen a huge
uptake in businesses seeking
Nottingham has alternative means of transport
300 miles
of new or upgraded
for their employees. It is great
to see so many bikes, electric
cycle paths bikes and cargo bikes in and
around Nottingham. The WPL
is clearly having a big impact,
reducing congestion and
improving air quality as more
people choose walking, cycling,
or public transport - and we at
Raleigh support this.
Ed Pegram
Head of Marketing, Raleigh UK Ltd

15
Supporting businesses
in our city
The Workplace Travel Service was created as part of the Workplace
Parking Levy implementation and provides a free service to businesses in
Nottingham. Our expert team offer advice, support and grants to employers
who need assistance with travel planning, car park management,
sustainable transport options and improvements to encourage their
employees to use public transport.

Successful workshops, on-site events and partnerships have enabled
450 companies to benefit from the scheme, with grants of up to £25,000
available to expand facilities.

In ten years, £1 million has been given out in grants, with businesses
investing £209,000 of their own money. The funding has secured facilities
such as cycle shelters, showers and drying facilities, electric vehicle charge
points and improvements to security.

With the help of the WPL, we were able to secure a grant to help
fund the new bicycle shelter we have in place for our staff members.
We received free workshops on-site such as Dr. Bike, staff were able to
have their bicycles serviced and bicycle parts were offered free of charge.
Smart Manufacturing Technology

16
Innovative transport solutions
By working together with our Connectivity eScooters Electric Council Fleet
partners to inspire greener
> Our innovative Robin Hood Card and > 1.4 million rides with 2.1 million miles > We have the first Original Equipment
ways of getting around our
app allows passengers to use the travelled since October 2020 Manufacturer electric bin lorry in
city, we are leading the way
most efficient sustainable transport > Over 1,700 users per day ride the the world
in sustainable transport
option for their journey, whether that 1000 eScooters > Purchased the first fully electric
advancements and have
be bus, tram or train sweepers, cage tippers and
implemented revolutionary
trials and initiatives for future eCargo Bikes minibuses in the UK
travel options. ULEV Taxis > Establishing a Nottingham fleet
> Over half of Nottingham City
Council’s fleet is now fully electric
> Try-before-you-buy schemes, taxi to deliver three trial areas: the
and zero tailpipe emission
only charge points and wireless council’s own internal fleet, local
charging trials to encourage taxi > Opening the first publicly owned
project delivery partners and a
drivers to switch to ULEV vehicle workshop exclusively for
free try-before-you-buy scheme
ULEVs
> 15% of taxis are for Nottingham based businesses
now ULEV through the Workplace Travel Service
> Targeting last mile delivery and
enabling a clean freight system as 
part of the CN28 plan

17
Future
Shaping the future
connectivity Sharing our knowledge
Nottingham City Council has transformed the way councils
and governments across Europe view transport. The work Using our unique expertise and experience, we are helping other local authorities to
undertaken so far will allow Nottingham to continue to introduce tailor-made WPL schemes of their own. We recognise that a WPL scheme
grow in the long term without the adverse impact on health is not “one size fits all” and can be personalised to a local area to achieve the best
and wellbeing often associated with concentrated building results. We have done the groundwork on establishing the process for creating an
in a city. In the past ten years, the scheme has facilitated effective WPL scheme and want to share this knowledge with others, encouraging
a step change in many areas with proven results and has sustainable transport innovation, ensuring that any benefits are realised on a national
put in place the foundations to ensure Nottingham is a scale and creating a coordinated approach with other local authorities.
sustainable city that is fit for the future.

Long-term investments Continually improving
What we now know:
We will continue to invest in driving With a progressive and focused
> Businesses directly benefit from better transport
efficiency through sustainable attitude, we are always looking to make
> The WPL is a catalyst for economic growth transport with secured funding from the connecting people easier, greener
> The WPL is effective in tackling congestion Transforming Cities Fund and Future and smoother, especially as our city
> Transport improvements create jobs, Transport Zones with D2N2. adapts to the effects of COVID-19. To
infrastructure and investment ensure that we do this efficiently and
D2N2 is one of the largest Local
> The WPL encourages commuter travel productively we must continuously learn
Enterprise Partnerships in England and
from what we are doing. By sharing
planning by employers it aims to lead and support economic
knowledge and understanding of the
> We are thinking about the environment growth across Derby, Derbyshire,
scheme, we will ensure that the WPL is
more consciously Nottingham and Nottinghamshire.
for 2022 and beyond.

18
Since the early 1970s, Nottingham has been a
notable UK city in developing innovative solutions
for public transport, walking and cycling that are central to
sustainable urban mobility today.
The Workplace Parking Levy ‘levels the playing field’ while
raising revenues to support transport improvements that
can benefit everyone and the environment. Given the
success shown by Nottingham, it is surprising that other
UK cities are yet to follow its clear lead.
Professor Graham Parkhurst
Director, Centre for Transport and Society,
University of West of England, Bristol

19
November 2022

Thank you for your continued
support over the last ten years
We have accomplished so much together and we look forward to achieving
even more sustainable growth in our city in the years to come

Contact Us
We would love to hear your feedback,
so please get in touch with the team on:

0115 8765050

WorkplaceParkingLevy@nottinghamcity.gov.uk

www.nottinghamcity.gov.uk/wpl

Recognised by
