Public Document Pack

Transport & Connectivity
Policy Committee
Agenda

Date: Thursday, 23 October 2025
Time: 5.00 pm
Venue: The Council Chamber - City Hall, College
Green, Bristol, BS1 5TR

Distribution:
Councillors: Ed Plowden (Chair), Graham Morris (Vice-Chair), Donald Alexander, Rob Bryher,
Nicholas Coombes, Tim Rippington, Emma Edwards, Kaz Self and David Wilcox

Issued by: Sam Wilcock, Policy Committee Officer
City Hall, College Green, Bristol BS1 5TR
E-mail: policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk
Date: Wednesday, 15 October 2025
Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee – Agenda

Agenda
1. Welcome, Introductions and Safety Information
(Pages 6 - 8)
2. Apologies for Absence and Substitutions

3. Declarations of Interest
To note any declarations of interest from councillors. They are asked to
indicate the relevant agenda item, the nature of the interest and in particular
whether it is a disclosable pecuniary interest.

Any declaration of interest made at the meeting which is not on the register of
interests should be notified to the Monitoring Officer for inclusion.

4. Minutes of the Previous Meeting
(Pages 9 - 18)
5. Chair's Announcements
To receive any announcements from the Chair.

6. Public Forum
Up to 30 minutes is allowed for this item.

Any member of the public or councillor may participate in Public Forum. Public
Forum items must relate to the remit of the committee and should be addressed
to the Chair of the committee.

Members of the public who plan to attend a public meeting at City Hall are
advised that you will be required to sign in when you arrive. Please note that you
will be issued with a visitor pass which you will need to display at all times.

Please also note:

Questions
1. Written public questions must be received by 5.00 pm, at least 3 clear
working days prior to the meeting. For this meeting, this means that
questions must be received at the latest by 5.00 pm on Friday 17 October
2025. Public Questions should be submitted via our webform:
www.bristol.gov.uk/publicforum
Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee – Agenda

2. Any individual can submit up to 3 written questions.
3. Written replies to questions will be available on the Council’s website at
least one hour before the meeting.
4. At the meeting, questioners will be permitted to ask up to 2 oral
supplementary questions.

Statements
1. Written statements must be received at latest by 12.00 noon, at least 2
working days prior to the meeting. For this meeting, this means that
statements must be received at the latest by 12.00 noon on Tuesday 21
October 2025. Public Statements should be submitted via our webform:
www.bristol.gov.uk/publicforum
2. Statements, provided they are no more than 1,000 words in length, will
be circulated to all committee members and will be published on the
Council’s website at least one hour before the meeting.

Petitions
1. Details of the wording of any petitions, and the number of signatories to
petitions must be received at latest by 12.00 noon, at least 2 working days
prior to the meeting. For this meeting, this means that petition details
must be received at the latest by 12.00 noon on Tuesday 21 October
2025. Please email petition details to policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk
2. At the meeting, individuals presenting petitions may be required to read
out the objectives of the petition.

When submitting a question or statement please indicate whether you are planning
to attend the meeting to present your statement ask your question

7. Management and Mitigation of CRSTS Scheme Delivery
To update on the likely short-term impacts of constructing the City Region (Pages 19 - 41)
Sustainable Transport Settlement (CRSTS) schemes and the mitigation measures
being put in place to minimise disruption.

8. Bristol Resident Parking Scheme Expansion Programme
This paper sets out the case for expanding Bristol City Council’s (BCC) Resident (Pages 42 - 68)
Parking Schemes (RPS) programme (formerly Resident Parking Zones). It outlines
how the implementation of RPS can support BCC in better managing parking to
prioritise more sustainable uses of the kerbside, reduce private vehicle trips, and
enhance safety and environmental quality across all wards.
Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee – Agenda

9. CAZ Exemption and Financial Support Package
To seek approval of a time limited exemption package for eligible citizens with (Pages 69 - 140)
Clean Air Zone (CAZ) non-compliant vehicles impacted by the introduction of a
Bus Lane and Bus Gate on Queens Road and Park Street

10. Cycle Hangar Policy
To seek approval to enact a target policy for the delivery of new cycle hangars up (Pages 141 - 182)
to 2030, and to adopt the proposed position. To seek delegated approval to bid
for, accept and commit to any funding in support of the policy.

11. Centre Line Policy
To seek approval from the Transport and Connectivity Committee on a policy (Pages 183 - 198)
position that road centrelines on selected 20mph roads are not reinstated as
default following resurfacing so that road safety benefits are realised by this
maintenance programme, and are only reinstated where determined essential by
the Road Safety Team. Alongside this, the safeguarding process for reviewing and
implementing changes is presented.

12. Vehicle towing contract
To seek approval to reprocure the Highway Maintenance Vehicle Towing (Pages 199 - 209)
Contract. The contract is essential to gain site possession to carryout Statutory
Highway Maintenance and other related works in Bristol’s busy urban
environment. The towing contractor removes parked vehicles which remain in
place despite advanced notification of the work, and places them in a
neighbouring street.

13. Workplace Parking Levy Update report
To update the committee on progress with the Workplace Parking Levy Outline (Pages 210 - 299)
Business Case (OBC) and to outline progress on key project milestones.

14. Quarterly Finance Report: P5/Q2
The Council Revenue and Capital budget for 2025/26 was agreed by Full Council (Pages 300 - 305)
on 25 February 2025. This report presents to the Transport and Connectivity
Committee the financial forecast at Period 5 (P5) against the budget as at the end
of August 2025.
Transport & Connectivity Policy Committee – Agenda

Information note – Officer Executive Decisions
Please note that the Council publishes details of Officer Executive Decisions that have been taken. These
are decisions which do not meet the criteria for a formal key decision to be taken at a Policy Committee
meeting, but are considered to be important enough to be open to public scrutiny. This includes all
Officer Executive Decisions involving a resource commitment of between £100,000 and £500,000 taken in
consultation with the relevant Policy Committee Chair. Officer Executive Decisions are also published
when a key decision has been to a Policy Committee and authority delegated to an officer to take the
decision. Details can be found here:
Officer executive decisions (bristol.gov.uk)
Agenda Item 1
www.bristol.gov.uk

Public Information Sheet
Inspection of Papers - Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985

You can find papers for all our meetings on our website at www.bristol.gov.uk.

Public meetings for Policy Committees are held at City Hall.

Attendance at Public meetings

Bristol City Council welcomes public attendance and participation at all of its formal committee
meetings. When attending public meetings please behave with courtesy, tolerance and respect at
all times to Councillors, Council Officers and other meeting participants. Attendees who cause
disturbance may be asked to leave or, may be removed from the meeting.

If you’re a member of the press or public and want to attend a public meeting at City Hall, you will
need to sign in when you arrive. You will be issued with a visitor pass which you will need to
display at all times.

Due to the maximum occupancy of the venue, you may be asked to watch the meeting on a screen
in another room.

Other formats and languages and assistance for those with hearing impairment
Other o check with and
You can get committee papers in other formats (e.g. large print, audio tape, braille etc) or in
community languages by contacting the Policy Committee Officer. Please give as much notice as
possible. We cannot guarantee re-formatting or translation of papers before the date of a
particular meeting.

Committee rooms are fitted with induction loops to assist people with hearing impairment. If you
require any assistance with this please speak to the Policy Committee Officer.

Public Forum
Members of the public may make a written statement, ask a question, or present a petition to
most meetings. Please ensure that any submissions made are respectful, factual, and relevant.

• By contributing to the public forum process the participant acknowledges that any content
submitted is at the authors own risk and the Council disclaims any obligation or
responsibility for it.
• Questions, Statements and Petitions should be factually based and should not contain
anything that could be construed as being defamatory, frivolous or offensive. Any

Page 6
www.bristol.gov.uk

submission including such information shall be redacted prior to publication without notice
to the author.
• The Council reserves the right to reject any submission it deems defamatory, frivolous or
offensive at its sole discretion.
• Sensitive personal information may be deleted or redacted
• Officer’s names below Head of Service, will be replaced by the Officer’s job title
• Company names may be deleted or redacted

Your statement or question will be sent to the Committee Members and will be published on the
Council’s website before the meeting.

Public Questions and Statements should be submitted via our webform:
www.bristol.gov.uk/publicforum

Petitions should be e-mailed to policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

The following requirements apply:

• The statement is received no later than 12.00 noon two working days before the meeting and
is about a matter which is the responsibility of the committee concerned.
• The question is received no later than 5pm three clear working days before the meeting.

Any statement submitted should be no longer than one side of A4 paper. For copyright reasons,
we are unable to reproduce or publish newspaper or magazine articles that may be attached to
statements.

By participating in public forum business, we will assume that you have consented to your name
and the details of your submission being recorded and circulated to the Committee and published
within the minutes. Your statement or question will also be made available to the public via
publication on the Council’s website and may be provided upon request in response to Freedom of
Information Act requests in the future.

We will try to remove personal and identifiable information. However, because of time
constraints we cannot guarantee this, and you may therefore wish to consider if your statement
contains information that you would prefer not to be in the public domain. Other committee
papers may be placed on the council’s website and information within them may be searchable on
the internet.

During the meeting:

• Public Forum is normally one of the first items on the agenda, although statements and
petitions that relate to specific items on the agenda may be taken just before the item
concerned.
• There will be no debate on statements or petitions.

Page 7
www.bristol.gov.uk

• The Chair will call each submission in turn. When you are invited to speak, please make sure
that your presentation focuses on the key issues that you would like Members to consider.
This will have the greatest impact.
• Your time allocation may have to be strictly limited if there are a lot of submissions. This may
be as short as one minute.
• If there are a large number of submissions on one matter a representative may be requested
to speak on the groups behalf.
• If you do not attend or speak at the meeting at which your public forum submission is being
taken your statement will be noted by Members.
• Under our security arrangements, please note that members of the public (and bags) may be
searched. This may apply in the interests of helping to ensure a safe meeting environment for
all attending.
• As part of the drive to reduce single-use plastics in council-owned buildings, please bring your
own water bottle in order to fill up from the water dispenser.

For further information about procedure rules please refer to our Constitution
https://www.bristol.gov.uk/how-council-decisions-are-made/constitution

Webcasting/ Recording of meetings

Members of the public attending meetings or taking part in Public forum are advised that Policy
Committee meetings may be filmed for live or subsequent broadcast via the council's webcasting
pages. The whole of the meeting is filmed (except where there are confidential or exempt
items). If you ask a question or make a representation, then you are likely to be filmed and will be
deemed to have given your consent to this. If you do not wish to be filmed you need to make
yourself known to the webcasting staff. However, the Openness of Local Government Bodies
Regulations 2014 now means that persons attending meetings may take photographs, film and
audio record the proceedings and report on the meeting (Oral commentary is not permitted
during the meeting as it would be disruptive). Members of the public should therefore be aware
that they may be filmed by others attending and that is not within the council’s control.

Our privacy notice can be viewed at www.bristol.gov.uk/about-our-website/privacy-and-
processing-notices-for-resource-services

Page 8
Agenda Item 4

Bristol City Council
Minutes of the Transport & Connectivity
Policy Committee

11 September 2025 at 5.00 pm

Members Present:-
Councillors: Ed Plowden (Chair), Graham Morris (Vice-Chair), Donald Alexander, Nicholas Coombes,
Emma Edwards, Cam Hayward, Tim Rippington, Kaz Self and David Wilcox

1 Welcome, Introductions and Safety Information

The Chair welcomed all attendees to the meeting and explained the emergency evacuation procedure.

The Chair asked the Committee members to introduce themselves.

2 Apologies for Absence and Substitutions

There were apologies from Councillor Rob Bryher. Councillor Cam Hayward attended as substitute.

3 Declarations of Interest

There were none.

4 Minutes of the Previous Meeting

The minutes of the previous meeting were agreed as accurate.

Q19, Q20 & Q21 – Officers were asked to confirm that the latest drawings had been sent to Mr Davies as
requested. Additionally, the other suggestions relating to Sylvan Way were forwarded to the Project
Manager for consideration and a dialogue is ongoing.

Page 9
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Q25, 25 & 27 – With regards to the Haymarket bus stop serving routes 5 and 8, officers were asked to
confirm that an officer visited the stop to inspect its accessibility.

Q29. 30, 31 – The Chair had raised taxis for incomplete journeys with Stagecoach and FirstBus and was
awaiting a response.

Electric Vehicle Cross Pavement Charging Policy Review
Officers had visited the Lockleaze Bonnington Walk site to assess the EV charging infrastructure. As it was
not an adopted highway it did not meet current adoptable highway standards.

5 Chair's Announcements

The Chair highlighted the following:
 Officer Decision Notices continue to be published on the www.bristol.gov.uk website on the page
ModernGov - bristol.gov.uk
 Updated monitoring and evaluation plan had been published. Latest news can be found on the
webpage Latest news. Datasets and engagement information from the East Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood would continue to be shared.

6 Public Forum

The Committee noted that the following Public Forum had been received.

Public Petitions
There were no public petitions received for this meeting.

Public Statements
10 statements were received and noted as follows:

Ref No Name Title
01 Caroline Dunn The Transport Committee does not
care about disabled people
02 Melissa Topping EBLN trial reassessment.
03 Henry Roy EBLN problems
04 Bristol Cycling Campaign Road Safety Task and Finish Group
05 Councillor Heather Mack Concorde Way
07 Reclaim Our Buses (Charlie, Emilia & Jo) Better Buses for Bristol
08 Megs Smith Climate Emergency

Page 10
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

09 David Redgewell South west transport Public Transport Network
Network and Railfuture Severnside
10 Rosa Kell Somerset catch the bus campaign Public Transport Network
and Somerset bus partnership.

Statements 1, 2, 4, 7 and 8 were presented to the Committee.

Public Forum Questions
30 questions were received as follows:

Ref No Name Title
01, 02 &03 Cllr Hucker 2025 Bus Gate Contraventions
04 Sam Astall Follow up question Trade parking permits for
Peripatetic music teachers
05 Sam Astall Follow up question Poor resorting work with lack of
consideration of residents
06, 07 & 08 Melissa Topping EBLN
09 Haydn Gill Monitoring EBLN
10 Tristan Beckett Extremely Dangerous Junction Of Pile Marsh and
Blackswarth Road caused by the EBLN restricting exit
for Netham Road residents
11, 12 & 13 Satwant Phull East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
14 Dan Ackroyd As systems grow in complexity, they tend to oppose
their stated function
15 Dan Ackroyd If your problem seems unsolvable, consider that you
may have a meta-problem.
16 Dan Ackroyd Safe cycling surface
17, 18 & 19 David Redgewell Transport Issues
20 Bristol Cycling Planned works on Christmas Street
Campaign
21 & 22 Alan Morris, Bristol Christmas Street works and the pedestrian experience
Walking Alliance
23 Rosa Kell Bus Lanes and priority measures from Street and
Taunton to Bristol
24 Rosa Kell Electrification of the Bus Network
25 Rosa Kell Plans for Bus Interchange
26 Cllr Jos Clark On-street Electric Charging Points
27 Cllr Jos Clark Electric charging gulleys
28 Matt Sanders Tribunal Rules Bus Gate Signage is “Defective”
29 Matt Sanders Cumberland Road Bus Gate: Illegal Prosecutions
30 Matt Sanders Undersized Bus Gate Signage

Page 11
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Those who attended the meeting were invited to ask up to two supplementary questions.

Q6, Q7, Q8 – Melissa Topping
In response to follow-up questions, it was clarified that data has been collected before the start of the
trial period as well as during. The start date of 14/04/25 had been identified as when the vast majority of
the scheme had been installed. Data will be collated, analysed and evaluated following the end of the six
month trail. Release of the data is planned for December 2025 and a report to the Committee in the
Spring of 2026.

The WECIL report about accessibility in the local area was being evaluated and responses prepared in
response to recommendations as well as continued dialogue. The EQIA reflects many different
individuals, groups and other forms of feedback and would continue to be updated.

Q10 Tristan Beckett
Officers confirmed that a Traffic Regulation Order would be required to introduce a yellow box to the exit
from Pile Marsh onto Blackswarth Road. The junction would be assessed following the conclusion of the
trial period, along with the impacts of the scheme as a whole.

Q11, Q12, Q13 Satwant Phull
It was clarified that the engagement consultation exercise for EBLN had contained a free text option. The
trial would continue with a decision regarding the future of the scheme in coming months.

Q14, Q15, Q16 – Dan Ackroyd
Officers would respond in more detail outlining the process leading to the design of the junction
connecting Richmond Hill/Queens Road (ACTION). It was confirmed that the Active Travel England Panel
and Guidelines had not raised concerns in relation to the junction.

Q20 – Bristol Cycling Campaign
Officers accepted a meeting with Bristol Cycling Campaign and Bristol Walking Alliance to consider the
rationale behind the alteration in design. It was requested that the Road Safety audit of that junction be
provided in advance of that meeting (ACTION)

Q28, Q29, Q30 – Matt Sanders
It was confirmed by officers that yellow warning signs are guidance, providing additional information to
users but not a legal requirement. The signs were designed to comply with the Traffic Signs manual and
guidance. If there are any site specific changes to the design this will become known at installation phase.

Officers took away the information regarding the length of time that the yellow signs have been in the
City Centre.

Page 12
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

7 Road Safety Task and Finish Group

The Committee considered a report that proposed the establishment of a task and finish group for the
development of the Road Safety Strategy, and associated Terms of Reference.

It was noted that this was a non key decision report.

The report was introduced and outlined by officers and Councillor Wilcox as the proposed Chair of the
Group. Through discussion, Members raised the following points:

- Full Council supported ‘Vision Zero’ in July 2023, aiming for zero road deaths or serious injuries.
- An average of 5 people a day are killed on the roads, with little year on year reduction.
- The current Road Safety Strategy (2014 -2024) is due for renewal to reflect new challenges and
developments including consideration of new transport modes: e-scooters, delivery vehicles,
autonomous vehicles and sustainable traffic. Target completion for the new strategy was March
2026.
- There was debate over whether the project should be officer led or Councillor led through a Task
and Finish Group. Concerns were that the involvement of Councillors could slow progress, or the
alternative view that Councillors can provide valuable insights on local accident hot spots and
issues raised through casework.
- There could be scope to influence the consultation on autonomous vehicles (a response had been
submitted from the Public Safety and Protection Committee).
- It was important to include a wide range of stakeholders such as the gig economy (e.g
Independent Workers Union). A stakeholders list would be reviewed at the beginning of the
process.

Following the discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded
by Councillor Wilcox.

On being put to the vote the recommendations were CARRIED unanimously and it was APPROVED;

1. That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity noted the report and further details supplied in
Appendix A and approved the recommended approach and Terms of Reference for the Road Safety
Task and Finish Group.
2. That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity agreed the frequency and duration of meetings
to inform the Terms of Reference

Page 13
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

8 Active Travel Fund tranche 5 and 6 bid

The Committee considered a report that sought approval to accept and spend £2,286,807 funding from
Active Travel Fund tranche 5 and 6. This would be used to develop and deliver several active travel
projects.

It was noted that this was a key decision as it involved over £500k and impacted 2 or more wards.

Officers introduced the report clarifying the following:

The active travel programme of schemes includes the proposal to remove motorised traffic from Prince
Street Bridge as part of this funding stream. Other development projects included walking and cycling
improvements alongside the A4 Bath Bridges, extension of the secure cycle parking programme and two
new school streets.

With reference to the Prince Street Bridge, delivery was now proposed for March 2028 (previously 2027).
The change allows further time to mitigate concerns about implementation, particularly in relation to
nearby roadworks. Further modelling will be undertaken as part of the scheme development.

The Members asked questions and commented as follows:

 The Chair highlighted that the closure designs for Prince Street Bridge were not irreversible and
could be used flexibly in response to unplanned events on the network. The bridge cannot
support HGVs or buses, so could not form part of a full diversionary route.
 Members welcomed the consideration of improvements to the Bath Road corridor for pedestrians
and cyclists. It was suggested that the scheme should explore reallocating road space along the
existing road/ bridges. The project would consider the wider context of Temple Meads, no.2 bus
corridor and Temple Quay.
 Prince Street Bridge is primarily used by pedestrians. Although vehicular traffic is low, diverted
traffic may still have an impact
 It was clarified that the Cumberland Road Bus Gate had been introduced to support public
transport improvements and as a requirement of the Clean Air Zone. The bus gate itself did not
affect the westbound journeys to Spike Island. Further modelling will assess the impact of the
Prince Street Bridge closure, including cumulative effects on Spike Island.
 Future designs changes to Prince Street Bridge would be presented to a Policy Committee Chairs
Briefing inviting the Policy Committee members and Ward Councillors. The Chair could then
decide that it should return to the full Committee if appropriate. (ACTION)
 It was suggested that key risks should be presented earlier in future reports for clarity.
 It was suggested that improvements to the Bascule Bridge appeared to have reduced reliance on
Prince Street Bridge. The longevity and resilience of the Bascule Bridge should be factored into
plans.

Page 14
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

 Members raised concerns about the geographical spread of active travel investment and it was
considered that current scoring tended to favour central areas with higher footfall. It was hoped
that the Movement Plan would help identify any gaps in the current network, especially in
economically disadvantaged areas.
 Pavements should be considered part of active travel network. Poor pavement conditions can be
just as limiting as other barriers to walking.

Following the discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded
by Councillor Rippington.

On being put to the vote the recommendations were CARRIED unanimously. It was APPROVED that;

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity
1. Approved the acceptance of the next tranches of the Active Travel Fund of £2,286,807 for Bristol
which will fund active travel project delivery and development in Bristol until the funding deadline
of March 2027.
2. Endorsed the specific schemes or initiatives that will be funded through this allocation which are:
Prince Street Bridge design and delivery, A4 Bath Bridges walking and cycling development project,
delivery of two School Streets, delivery of secure cycle storage, and behaviour change initiatives.

Contractual:
3. Authorised the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of
Transport and Connectivity Committee to take all steps required to spend the funding to deliver
active travel projects, including procuring and awarding contracts above the key decision
threshold, in-line with the maximum budget envelopes and as outlined in this report.
4. Authorised the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration to invoke any subsequent
extensions/variations specifically defined in the contract(s) being awarded, up to the maximum
budget envelope outlined in this report.

9 Avon Fixed Bridge

The Committee considered a report that sought approval of spend to assess the design and works
required to keep Avon Fixed Bridge safely operational, ensuring the Authority is discharging its statutory
duty in this matter.

It was noted that this was a key decision affecting 2 or more wards.

The Head of Highways introduced and outlined the report.

In response to Member questions, officers confirmed that the Avon Fixed Bridge had been constructed in
the 1960s using methods that would not meet modern day standards. Any future design would include
future proofing to accommodate changing vehicles and pressures.

Page 15
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

The proposed structural assessment would seek to establish the current condition of the bridge and
inform future planning. It was expected to take 6-12 months to complete and would be designed so that,
if critical repairs are identified, the same scaffolding erected for assessment can be utilised for repairs.
Solutions such as those used on Hammersmith Bridge are being reviewed as potential methods for
intervention.

The bridge is an asset for which Bristol City Council is responsible for repair and maintenance. If
additional funding is required, officers would explore regional and national grant opportunities.

Plans for the bridge will be considered in the context of active travel aspirations and the Western Harbour
development. Officers are working closely with the Western Harbour team to ensure any proposals are
coordinated and complimentary.

Following the discussion, the report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded
by Councillor Morris.

On being put to the vote the recommendations were CARRIED unanimously. It was APPROVED that:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:

1. Approved the spend of £500,000 to Assess the bridge and design the works required to keep Avon
Fixed Bridge safely operational, ensuring the Authority is discharging its statutory duty in this
matter. Refer to evidence base for full details.
2. Approved the proposal to undertake a full category 3 structural assessment of the Avon Fixed
Bridge as outlined in this report.
3. Authorised the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of
Transport and Connectivity Committee to take all steps required to the spend the funding to
undertake the full category 3 structural assessment for the Avon Fixed Bridge and designing the
subsequent required works, including procuring and awarding contracts which may be over the key
decision threshold, as outlined in this report.

10 Concorde Way cycle scheme acceptance into City Region Sustainable Transport
Settlement (CRSTS)

The Committee considered a report which noted that the Concorde Way cycle scheme has been accepted
into the City Region Sustainable Transport Settlement (CRSTS) overprogramming programme as
proposed by WECA, including the submission of the Feasibility and Development Funding Application
Form (FADFAF) to seek the development funding. The report also formally asked the Committee to agree
to the change in the funding source.

It was noted that this was an non-key decision update report.

Page 16
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

Officers introduced and outlined the report. The scheme was currently in development, with recent
engagement activities having taken place. The Full Business Case would be presented to the Committee
in Spring 2026.

The report recommendations were moved by Councillor Plowden and seconded by Councillor Wilcox.

On being put to the vote the recommendations were CARRIED unanimously. It was APPROVED that;

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:
Agreed to having the Concorde Way cycle scheme accepted into the CRSTS overprogramming
programme, as proposed by WECA, including the submission of the Feasibility and Development
Funding Application Form (FADFAF) to seek the development funding.

11 Q1 Corporate Risk Report 2025/26

The Committee considered the report which provided an update on current significant strategic risks,
relevant to the Transport and Connectivity Committee, to achieving the Council’s objectives as set out in
the Corporate Strategy 2025 – 2030 and summarising progress in managing the risks and actions being
taken as at quarter 1 2025-26.

It was noted that this was a report for information.

The Director Economy of Place introduced and outlined the report to the end of quarter 1. The two main
risks presented were previously received in April and July 2025. It was highlighted that some of the risk
ratings were likely to be adjusted in future reports, specifically in reference to the condition of the
Harbour Assets and CRSTS future planning.

Risks were reviewed on a monthly basis with the highest rated risks presented to senior leadership and
the Policy Committee. Officers agreed to consider how to provide a picture of the lower rated risks and
risks managed sufficiently to make the Committee aware.

With reference to CRR58:
 Specifically in respect of the harbour walls, it was confirmed that the risk had been adjusted from
‘likely’ to ‘almost certain’. The risk tolerance rating was also further explained.
 It was suggested that the risk could be broken down into separate elements within ‘Highway,
Traffic, Parking and Docks infrastructure assets’ as the bracket spanned a wide range of assets
with differing risk.
 Officers confirmed that information regarding risk on carriageways, such as condition survey data
that informs the road maintenance program, can be found online at webpage Department for
Transport funding and report Local highways maintenance transparency report. More detail was
due to be released at the end of October.

Page 17
policycommittees@bristol.gov.uk

With reference to CRR43:
 A report would be presented to the next meeting of this Policy Committee to update on the likely
impacts of constructing the City Region Sustainable Transport Settlement (CRSTS) schemes.
 The Chair continues to challenge directors of the authorities as well as companies to collaborate
effectively in managing the transport network during disruption periods. Emphasis was placed on
communication with bus passengers and the wider travelling public.

The Transport and Connectivity Committee noted the report and the report they received at the 10 July
meeting.

12 Policy Committee Work Programme Setting - Outcome Report

The Committee considered the report which noted the outcomes of the six monthly work programme
setting workshop held in June 2025. The report was presented for information with the following
discussion points noted:

The Committee discussed the potential for insourcing elements of the highways maintenance contract. It
was suggested that the procurement contract does not preclude a narrow cohort of work being
undertaken in house if required and ‘white lining’ was highlighted as a possible area that could benefit
from in house provision. The Committee requested that this topic remain under consideration, with a
future discussion to consider the pros and cons.

The Transforming Cities Region Forward Plan, now including maintenance, was highlighted as an
important document to help understand how schemes interact and align with each other.

An options paper on municipal bus companies would be provided to the next workshopping session
subject to officer resource.

The Committee for Transport and Connectivity noted the work programme update.

Meeting ended at 7.30 pm

CHAIR __________________

Page 18
Agenda Item 7

Non-key Decision Committee Report

PURPOSE: For information

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 23 October 2025

TITLE: Management and Mitigation of CRSTS Scheme Delivery
Officer presenting the report: Shaun Taylor. Job title: Head of Highways
Committee Chair: Cllr Ed Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Purpose of Report:
To update on the likely short-term impacts of constructing the City Region Sustainable Transport
Settlement (CRSTS) schemes and the mitigation measures being put in place to minimise disruption. The
deadline for CRSTS schemes is end of March 2027 but we have recently been informed that the
Department for Transport (DfT) would permit some limited construction past this date and up to March
2028, although their expectation is still that most funding must be spent by March 2027.
Evidence Base / Context
Between 2014 and 2024, Bristol saw an 11.4% population increase and is projected to exceed half a million
residents by 2030. To support this growth Bristol is investing in schools, housing, health and transport
infrastructure. The One City Plan integrates population growth with its vision to be carbon neutral by 2030
as it recognises that Bristol must overcome the challenge of limited road space by radically rethinking how
people and goods move around the city. Modal shift is essential to accommodate all these new journeys
and Bristol University undertook a study that showed that a shift to 55% active travel, 25% public transport
and 20% car use is required.

Bristol is making significant investments to expand sustainable transport networks and accelerate the
rollout of electric vehicle infrastructure. The CRSTS is part of this work and is delivering a transformational
investment in Bristol to support sustainable travel, reduce carbon emissions and improve connectivity. The
projects focus on improving main transport corridors and works in the city centre to improve bus reliability
and make walking and cycling a natural choice for short and medium journeys. As part of this investment
funding has been allocated for maintenance and infrastructure repairs to carriageways, footways and
includes lighting and traffic signals upgrades to help keep Bristol moving.

Several schemes must be delivered on these key routes into the city and throughout the central area as
part of CRSTS by March 2028. Owing to the funding conditions the construction periods of some schemes
will be constructed at the same time, but these will be carefully selected to ensure the impact on each
other is minimal. On completion, capacity for general traffic will have been reduced in some areas to make
way for sustainable modes. Until modal shift occurs at a level to match the reduced capacity congestion is
possible. The works themselves will reduce capacity and traffic levels may reduce through modal shift
throughout delivery which has been seen on previous major schemes such as Greater Bristol Bus Network

1
Version January 2024 Page 19
OFFICIAL
(GBBN) and Metrobus.

The Highway Authority oversees roadworks, utility companies, district heat network, developments,
incidents and highway projects as part of its routine operations. While the scale of investment and activity
planned for the coming years is unprecedented, the authority has proactively developed and implemented
mitigation measures to help minimise disruption. The attached presentation outlines these measures and
explains key principles guiding this work, including careful coordination and scheduling of each project to
reduce their collective impact on the wider network.

This approach combines several strategies: making full use of existing resources like the Operations Centre,
which serves as a hub for traffic monitoring and a control room for major incidents, realigning project
schedules to prevent key schemes from overlapping, and postponing projects such as Bond Street (to start
in early 2027 and complete by March 2028) where necessary to avoid conflicts. Additionally, there is a
proactive campaign to encourage public transport and active travel, including fare promotions, expanded
Park & Ride and other bus services, and the introduction of new routes. Discussions will also take place with
WECA to seek funding for additional roles in Bristol’s Operations Centre such as First bus and WECA
representatives.

The Council is also launching the ‘Bristol on the Move’ website www.bristolonthemove.com to provide up
to date information about the CRSTS transport corridor projects, to keep people informed of changes
during construction. The site will provide links for traffic information and has advice and support on how to
switch travel modes.

Officer Recommendations:
That the Transport and Connectivity committee:
1. note this report and accept that Bristol is entering a period of unprecedented works that may cause
delays and congestion to support the growth of the city and that work is underway to mitigate the
impact. Refer to the slide pack to see how the works will be mitigated.
2. note that the CRSTS schemes follow the Bristol transport policy and the themes identified in the
One City Plan to promote and deliver sustainable transport to reduce the impact of positive city
growth.

Corporate Strategy alignment:
Priority 4: Making it easier, greener and safer to travel into and around Bristol

1. Work with partners to improve accessible, reliable, affordable and sustainable transport choices.
2. Focus on areas with less reliable transport options to connect people and opportunities within and
beyond the city.
3. Maintain essential city infrastructure for safety, longevity and accessibility.

City Benefits:
1. Deliver Bristol’s transport policy
2. Provide improved sustainable transport measures for Bristol citizens
3. Ensure possible short and medium term impacts of delivering schemes are understood
4. Encourage modal shift for those that are able to use sustainable modes

2
Version January 2024 Page 20
OFFICIAL
Consultation Details:
Not applicable.

Background Documents:
Not applicable.

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Managing the Construction Impacts of CRSTS schemes paper YES

Appendix B - Managing the Construction Impacts of CRSTS schemes presentation YES

3
Version January 2024 Page 21
OFFICIAL
Appendix A

Management and Mitigation of CRSTS Scheme Delivery:

Prior to March 2028, Bristol will deliver a range of transformative projects schemes such as the A4
Portway, A4 Bath Road, A37/A4018 Corridor, Redcliffe Roundabout, Bedminster Bridges, Bond Street /
Newfoundland Circus, Union Street/Rupert Street as well as several smaller interventions. The primary
focus of these schemes is to deliver a more sustainable, accessible, and vibrant city by prioritising
improvements for buses, cyclists, and pedestrians, as well as enhancing the overall public realm. While
construction is possible up to March 2028 due to a change of position from the DfT, they have also
stated that they still expect most expenditure to happen by March 2027 so much of our delivery plan
will not change. We are however proposing to delay the Bond St scheme to mitigate traffic impacts.

By introducing dedicated bus lanes and gates, high-quality cycle infrastructure, and better pedestrian
facilities, these schemes will make sustainable travel easier and more attractive for everyone. All these
improvements are closely aligned with national, regional, and local transport policies, as well as
Bristol’s One City Plan, supporting our shared vision for a greener, healthier and more connected city.
Bristol’s road network is a valuable and limited resource. By reallocating road space to support
sustainable and high-capacity modes such as walking, cycling and public transport we can create a
more efficient, accessible and healthier city for everyone. Any reallocation to sustainable modes will
require a reduction to other general modes such as the car, van and other freight. This reduction in
general capacity relies on those that are able, to switch to sustainable modes of transport through
modal shift, which in turn will free up road space for those that require motorised transport, such as
disabled people and many delivery drivers and tradespeople.

As Bristol’s population continues to grow, promoting modal shift early will help manage future demand
on our transport network, reducing the number of projected vehicles joining the road. As such
investing in sustainable transport infrastructure is essential to enable this modal shift, without which
congestion will only continue to worsen.

Several schemes currently being developed for delivery are designed to support and encourage modal
shift to achieve the full benefits modelled. Without this modal shift the highway network will be over
capacity leading to congestion and delays at levels greater than are currently seen.

Bus patronage has been steadily increasing except for the pandemic years; and this positive trend
demonstrates growing demand for sustainable travel. However, private car and light goods vehicle
numbers have also returned to pre-pandemic levels, even with changes in office use. By delivering
these new schemes, there is a real opportunity to inspire and facilitate further modal shift.

Experience from schemes within Bristol and around the world shows that mode shift does occur when
road space is rebalanced and traffic capacity is reduced. The closure and transformation of Queens
Square to traffic over 30 years ago and the more recent closure of Bristol Bridge both indicate that
reallocating road space can reduce traffic without causing long term congestion. All the interventions
planned have been appraised using Department for Transport guidance and collectively show that they
can have a positive impact, and may even encourage more people to visit the City Centre.
1
Page 22
OFFICIAL
It is important to recognise that achieving the necessary modal shift is key to realising the full benefits
of the CRSTS schemes. If modal shift does not occur as planned, it is possible that delays will be
experienced around the city on completion of the CRSTS schemes owing to reduction in general traffic
capacity. However, these delays are expected to ease as more people choose sustainable travel options
or discover alternative routes.

Changes made to the City Centre and Temple Circus in recent years, with similar changes planned for
Bedminster Bridges, reduce the impacts of incidents as they reduce the likelihood of grid lock events
and enable better predictability of the network. By introducing measures such as banned turns and bus
gates, we can prioritise sustainable transport and improve overall network reliability.

While these restrictions reduce the number of alternate routes available during incidents or planned
works, schemes are being thoughtfully designed with flexibility in mind. Where possible, schemes are
being designed with the ability to reinstate certain movements should they be required to facilitate
other necessary works such as maintenance to Utility apparatus. This approach ensures that we
continue to balance the benefits of a more sustainable, predictable network with the need for
resilience and adaptability.

With limited time left to deliver the CRSTS programme and most schemes likely to take 12-18 months
to deliver, there may be overlap in the implementation of the schemes. Work is underway to identify
which schemes can be carried out concurrently and which must be done consecutively to ensure Bristol
can still thrive during this unprecedented period of change. The reasons for the end of programme
delivery are primarily owing to design time, business case sign offs and the approvals processes. Every
effort will be made to ensure schemes run to programme and suitable traffic management methods
are used to reduce the impacts of the works.

It should also be noted that other works will be going on in this time and beyond, notably, Utility works
and district heating. Works are planned to repair the M32 viaduct and are expected to have substantial
impacts on capacity of the M32 and surrounding areas for several years. While these works are not
expected to impact capacity until 2028, they will need to be managed with a view to facilitating mode
shift as part of the works. The ongoing capacity restrictions may assist with some of the mode shift
required across the city if well managed and BCC is engaging proactively with National Highways to
manage the potential impact, which will be felt citywide and acutely in East Bristol.

Risks or sensitivities identified:

Criticism is likely to be directed at the Authority through the period of delivery and the impacts it will
have on Bristol PLC throughout the works. Similar situations have occurred previously with major
transport schemes such as the Greater Bristol Bus Network and Metrobus programmes although not
on this scale. A robust response to these challenges has been developed making it clear that Bristol’s
transport policy is well established and the way to avoid delays and congestion is through modal shift
and embracing the investment in sustainable transport.

The Traffic Management Act 2005 (part 2) requires the Traffic Manager (Shaun Taylor as per the proper
officers list Part 3 of the constitution) to secure the expeditious movement of traffic on the Authority’s
road network and facilitate the expeditious movement of traffic on the road networks of other
2
Page 23
OFFICIAL
Authorities so far as may be reasonably practicable having regard to their other obligations, policies
and objectives. Further, the Traffic Manager is also required to identify things, including future
occurrences, which are causing, or have the potential to cause, road congestion or other disruption to
the movement of traffic on their road network and consider possible action that could be taken in
response to, or in anticipation of, anything so identified.

As part of this responsibility, elements of these schemes have been carefully assessed for their
potential to impact traffic flow to both Bristol’s road network and National Highways network. While
some temporary congestion or disruption may occur until such times as traffic flows are reduced
through modal shift, these schemes are designed to support long-term improvements in network
efficiency and reliability by encouraging more sustainable travel choices.

3
Page 24
OFFICIAL
Appendix B
Managing the Construction
Impact of City Region
Page 25
Sustainable Transport
Settlement (CRSTS) schemes
October 2025
Experience of project construction
CRSTS will impact traffic across Bristol’s highway network as key projects move
into construction stages - this is understood by T&C Committee.

Currently delivering bridge upgrades, maintenance schemes, Victoria Street,
Bedminster Green, A4 Portway P&R etc alongside utility companies and
developments.

Park Row - Recent example of a transport corridor project that has been

Page 26
delivered within budget, on time and with minimal impact to the network.
• Phased works to avoid full closures focusing on one stretch at a time​
• Continuous business access for vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists.​
• Temporary segregated pavements and cycle lanes were set up to ensure
safe travel during construction​.
• Construction schedules were shared in advance with the public and
businesses to prepare for short closures.

Operations Centre - central hub for proactive management of the network using
CCTV, traffic control systems, Variable Message Signs, transport operator liaison.
Operations Centre
• Central hub for CCTV and traffic monitoring – unique to the region
All the cameras feed into the centre giving operators real time oversight of the
road network, traffic flow and congestion hotspots

• Control room for major incidents
When collisions, road closures or emergencies occur the team coordinate the
necessary response e.g. divert traffic, liaise with emergency services, activate
signage and manage operations until the issue is resolved.

Page 27
• 24/7 operational capability
The centre functions continuously managing both routine and unexpected
events 24/7.

• Stakeholder liaison
There is space in the centre for transport providers, emergency services and
other stakeholders who may be required. Seek WECA funding for First Bus
and WECA Officer in the Operations Centre to help manage network issues
Public Transport

• As per previous slide seek funding for First Bus operative to be in Operations
Centre

• Recommend similar approach taken with WECA Transport Operations Team –
make desk available and rotate staffing to provide direct link to BCC Project
Officer, Network Management team, CCTV and Traffic Control team

Page 28
• Further mitigations already being planned in the form of fares promotions
and supported services through BSIP and Bus Grant:
• Additional P&R services and BSIP Enhanced Services
• New services funded using CAZ income, e.g. 16, 36, night buses
• Fares promotions, promoting new services, care leavers
Construction phasing plan - resource
Construction Manager
• Review buildability of each project and input into works info
• Align mobilisation schedules across contractors
• Coordinate across contractors and stakeholders
• Ensures traffic management plans are phased to avoid bottlenecks

Highway Network Programmer
• Road space booking and coordination/programming to avoid network clashes with

Page 29
non CRSTS works e.g. Utility works, developer schemes and District Heat Network
• Reviewing traffic management plans at tender stage for each project
• Construction oversight – review and consult on traffic management plans
• Advise project teams on acceptable works durations

Traffic Management Specialist
• Review each project and mitigate potential traffic delays
• Detailed phasing plans used to review the whole CRSTS programme
• Project teams provide specific designs to facilitate agreed phasing
Approach
Early contractor engagement workshops
• Presentation to contractors covering buildability and traffic management
• Share internal team phasing plan developed by the TM specialist
• Contractors use phasing plan to develop proposed phasing
• Highlights constraints and reinforce ambition to prioritising public transport
Mobilisation and construction
• Contractor submits detailed phasing plans and apply for Streetworks Permits
• Stakeholder consultation is embedded (bus operators, emergency services)

Page 30
• Traffic management plans finalised - closures, off peak / night works, Temporary
Traffic Orders, access needs
• Construction Manager / Network Mgt Programmer coordinates across schemes
• Integrated master schedule to coordinate works to reduce network conflict
Comms
• Creation of ‘Bristol on the Move’ website with clear and consistent messaging and
information www.bristolonthemove.com
• Transport engagement team – regular liaison with businesses, respond to public
queries during works, manage complaints and FOIs
Managing Cumulative Impacts
Concerns have been raised about the cumulative impacts of multiple road works on traffic flows.
However, the city centre is primarily a destination with limited through trips and the schemes are
generally separated so cumulative impacts are limited to adjacent projects.

The following summarises the approach for each of the 6 major city centre projects:

Temple Way: First to start; limited impacts expected due to available space and capacity.
Triangle/Park Street: Localised impacts from the Triangle scheme; parking loss during
construction, but road closures are unlikely. Early closure of Park Street helps mitigate
impacts.

Page 31
Bedminster Bridges: impacts expected; banning turns early and existing bus lanes will help
manage traffic.
Redcliff Roundabout: Ample space available; some impacts on bus services and traffic
delays.
Union Street: Likely to affect bus services and may result in the loss of some bus lanes, with
some impact on general traffic.
Bond Street: Some impact expected. Works are planned to start later (March 2027) to
further reduce overlap.

Careful planning and separation of schemes mean that citywide cumulative impacts are limited,
with most disruption managed locally and mitigated through targeted measures.
Cumulative Impacts – Key Nodes
• Red rated sites are
well spaced out. This
was considered when
developing the
programme
• Only one red site on
main city centre loop
• Combine Redcliff and
Page 32 Bedminster schemes
to better manage
impacts
Cumulative Impacts – York Rd
• York Rd closure
impacted
surrounding routes
• Notably Temple Way
and Wells Rd
• Congestion due to
full road closure and

Page 33
significant loss of
capacity
• Congestion did not
spread city wide or
cause major impacts
on other key nodes
Cumulative Impacts – Park St 1
• Image shows the
AM peak traffic flow
changes predicted
due to the closure of
Park St
• Impacts at
Bedminster and Bath

Page 34
Bridges and Redcliff
Roundabout are
minimal
• This demonstrates
no linkages or
cumulative impacts
Minimal traffic
diversions in this area due to the Park St
due to Park St closure scheme
Cumulative Impacts – Park St 2
• TomTom data report
showing traffic
destinations from
Whiteladies Rd
• Traffic disperses to
various routes and
destinations
• Less than 1% goes to
Page 35
Redcliff/Bedminster
• There are therefore
no cumulative
impacts between
Park St/Triangle and
Bedminster/Redciff
• Note 9% of traffic
goes to Cabot Circus
Cumulative Impacts – Park St/Union St
• Image shows the AM peak
traffic flow changes predicted
due to the closure of Park St –
focus on Union St junction
• Blue lines indicate reductions
in traffic volumes of 10-20%
• These reductions will enable

Page 36
works to proceed with limited
impacts when lane closures in
Traffic reduction place
around Union St • Propose Linsig modelling of TM
due to Park St plans based on these flows
closure • Main works and lane closures
to be delayed until Park St bus
gates in place
Cumulative Impacts – Bedminster/Redcliff 1
• TomTom data report
showing traffic destinations
from Bedminster Parade
• Traffic disperses to various
routes and destinations
• Less than 1% of traffic goes
to Park St/Triangle/Union
St
Page 37
• There are therefore no
cumulative impacts
between Park
St/Triangle/Union St and
Bedminster/Redciff
• Note 17% of traffic goes
through Cabot Circus
Cumulative Impacts – Bedminster/Redcliff 2
• TomTom data report
showing traffic destinations
from Coronation Rd
• Traffic disperses to various
routes and destinations
• Less than 1% of traffic goes
to Park St/Triangle/Union
St
Page 38
• There are therefore no
cumulative impacts
between Park
St/Triangle/Union St and
Bedminster/Redciff
• Note 19% of traffic goes
through Cabot Circus
Cumulative Impacts – Bond St Delay
• Bond St sits between
the two main works
areas of Triangle/Park
St/Union St and
Bedminster/Redcliff
roundabouts
• Both main works areas
have traffic going to
Page 39 Bond St/Cabot Circus
• Propose to delay Bond
St scheme to start
early 2027 to reduce
wider impacts
• Consider use of off
peak working for Bond
St scheme
Cumulative Impacts – Bond St Delay
• Cabot Circus traffic
distributes across the
city centre and small
proportions go
through Park St/Union
St and Bedminster
Redcliff
• This is also the case in
Page 40 reverse hence the
decision to delay
construction of the
Bond St scheme which
mainly impacts Cabot
Circus and the James
Barton
City Centre Construction Timeline

Page 41
Bond St scheme can be delayed to start March 2027 to reduce wider network
impacts and complete by March 28 to dovetail with the M32 works.

ATF 6 scheme Prince St Bridge also to be delayed so delivery does not clash
with Bedminster Bridges scheme.
Agenda Item 8

Committee Report

KEY DECISION OR FOR INFORMATION: Key decision over £500k

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 23 October 2025

TITLE: Bristol Resident Parking Scheme Expansion Programme

Ward(s): all

Officer presenting the report: Adam Crowther Job title: Head of City Transport

Committee Chair: Cllr Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: Committee Chair

Purpose of report

This paper sets out the case for expanding Bristol City Council’s (BCC) Resident Parking
Schemes (RPS) programme (formerly Resident Parking Zones). It outlines how the
implementation of RPS can support BCC in better managing parking to prioritise more
sustainable uses of the kerbside, reduce private vehicle trips, and enhance safety and
environmental quality across all wards. A costed delivery plan underpins the report, providing
the basis for drawing down funding from relevant funding streams.

Executive summary

RPS expansion is being proposed now to help tackle increasing pressure on parking, support
cleaner air, and make neighbourhoods safer and fairer for everyone. This will in turn make
parking easier and the proposed expansion of the RPS programme directly supports Bristol’s
wider strategic goals, including the ambitions set out in the One City Plan.

By helping to reduce car use, lower traffic volumes, and make it easier for people to choose
walking, cycling, or public transport, the scheme plays an important role in the city’s
aspirations to become carbon neutral by 2030. It also supports the aims of reducing carbon
emissions by cutting down on commuter traffic and improving air quality in residential areas.

Background

In November 2007, Bristol City Council (BCC) agreed in principle to introduce RPS around the
city centre to address commuter parking pressures. Consultations began in early 2008,
involving neighbourhood panels and wider public engagement to identify early adopter zones
by mid-2008. Initial implementation was planned for late spring 2009, with a wider rollout
targeted for completion by the end of 2012.

RPS expansion – October 2025 Page 42
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
In March 2013, plans were announced for an expanded RPS programme, which was
implemented by spring 2014 in the following areas (see figure 1 below):

• Bedminster East
• Bower Ashton
• Clifton East
• Clifton Village
• Clifton Wood and Hotwells
• Cotham
• Cotham North
• Easton and St Philips
• Kingsdown
• Montpelier
• Redcliffe
• Redland
• Southville
• Spike Island
• St Pauls

Plans were also developed to introduce RPS in additional areas forming an outer ring (light
blue areas in map below):

• St Andrews
• St Werburgh’s
• Ashley Down
• Bishopston
• Windmill Hill
• Ashton
• Totterdown
• Bedminster West

Figure 1 – RPS map published March 2013

RPS expansion – October 2025 Page 43
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
However, following the initial rollout completed in 2014, the expansion of new RPSs was
halted in 2016.

RPS expansion – October 2025 Page 44
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
The roll out of RPS followed the completion of the Greater Bristol Bus Network and the Cycling
City projects and since 2013 bus patronage has increased by 45%. Walking and cycling rates
have also been increasing in Bristol which has the highest mode share for walking and cycling
trips of all the core cities in the UK. Reviews were undertaken six months after implementation,
with an opportunity to tweak the details but no significant calls to remove them. The RPS
review commenced in early 2017 and was completed by the end of 2018, covering the
2017/18 period.

Policy Context

In 2023, BCC commissioned a review of RPS effectiveness to better align the scheme with
wider ‘Liveable Neighbourhoods’ objectives. These include promoting more sustainable uses
of kerbside space and reducing private vehicle use. Liveable Neighbourhood boundaries
provide a logical framework for RPS implementation, offering operational alignment and
delivering shared outcomes.

A suite of new policies are currently in development to help meet the goals set out in the One
City Plan, including a:

• Transport Movement Plan
• Kerbside & Parking Strategy
• Road Safety Strategy
• Investigating a Workplace Parking Levy

On 24 October 2024, the Transport and Connectivity (T&C) Policy Committee approved the
Terms of Reference for a Kerbside and Parking Task and Finish Group, with the following
objectives identified for further development:

• Safer and more accessible streets
• Healthier streets
• Accessible streets
• Resilient streets
• Welcoming streets

RPS play a key role in delivering these objectives by reducing traffic volumes, cutting vehicle
emissions, and improving air quality, all of which bring about significant health benefits for the
public. Notably, junctions are among the most common sites for collisions; the introduction of
double yellow lines at these points improves visibility for both drivers and pedestrians, thereby
reducing road danger. Issues also arise when there are no restrictions in place to protect road
corners which can reduce sight lines and create issues for turning vehicles. RPS act as a
mechanism for accelerating mitigations to these issues by managing parking e.g. introducing
double yellows at corners.

The Task & Finish Group agreed that RPS would not be in its scope and recommended that a
report is brought to committee.

In addition, parking controls support environmental goals by linking permit costs to vehicle
emissions. Higher-emission vehicles are charged more, providing an incentive for residents to

RPS expansion – October 2025 Page 45
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
switch to cleaner, low-emission models. Evidence suggests that areas with parking controls
tend to have higher ownership of low-emission vehicles and lower overall car ownership, which
correlates with reduced car usage.

Challenges

While RPS have been part of Bristol’s transport strategy for over a decade and are now a well-
established feature of the city, challenges remain. Each new RPS must be carefully designed
to reflect the needs of its local area, particularly in locations impacted by large venues such as
sports stadia or municipal facilities like swimming pools. Thorough public consultation will be
essential to ensure schemes are appropriately tailored.

There is also a growing need to review the current operation of RPSs across Bristol. This may
include updates to pricing structures, permit criteria, and the overall effectiveness of existing
schemes to ensure they remain fit for purpose and aligned with current policy goals. In
addition, there may be a need to split existing RPS areas into smaller sections to reflect the
local operational requirements.

Consultation

Engagement for new RPS will utilise a variety of methods to ensure meaningful community
involvement. These may include drop-in events, surveys, workshops, and online platforms to
gather a broad range of feedback. For example, engagement on the Totterdown Square RPS
could follow a co-design approach piloted in the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood project,
where early community feedback was actively used to shape design options. This collaborative
model ensures that local residents and businesses have a genuine influence on scheme
development, helping to build trust and create solutions tailored to local needs.

Each new RPS that is introduced will be subject to intermittent operational reviews to assess
the impact of the schemes and to recommend any changes that may be required.

Prioritisation

A committee report was submitted to the 15 May 2025 Transport and Connectivity Committee
to update on current proposals for new RPS schemes and to consider how additional RPS
schemes might be brought forward. The following criteria was agreed to enable prioritisation of
schemes:

a. Presence of Liveable Neighbourhood scheme
b. Proximity to existing RPS
c. Proximity to major trip generators
d. Proximity to city centre
e. Local demand
f. Potential strategic impact

Officers have since carried out a high level assessment along wider programme alignment to
determine the first phases of the RPS expansion which are listed in the delivery plans below.
We will also allow for an assessment of new RPS schemes that are identified via public
RPS expansion – October 2025 Page 46
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
feedback, ward councillors and the council’s ‘street improvement tool, which will be brought to
committee in 26/27 to obtain authorisation to begin development work in 2027/28.

Finance

RPS that are initially funded through a Clean Air Zone (CAZ) allocation are expected to
become financially self-sustaining over time and have the potential to generate a surplus of
between £100,000 and £300,000 per year per RPS. Schemes include Pay & Display elements
and will generate some income that will cover the costs of delivering and operating the
schemes. Any surplus will go back into transport schemes and revenue as well as repaying the
original CAZ investment.

The price of the permit for a property’s first car is set to cover the operational costs of running
an RPS, with the surplus being derived in the main from Pay & Display income with a
contribution also coming from permit costs for 2nd and 3rd car permits.

It is expected that the capital and operational costs for a typical RPS will be paid back within 2-
4 years depending on the amount of permits, pay and display bays and available kerbside
space. This funding model ensures that while the initial costs are covered by CAZ and then
repaid, the schemes ultimately deliver a return to the programme and support its long-term
sustainability.

Any income from the schemes should fund the costs of implementing and managing the zones
with surplus income from pay and display elements to be ringfenced for transport investment.
Work is currently under way through a proposed Transport Investment Plan (due to come to
the committee in Spring 2026) to determine levels of income from various transport
sources,how these might vary over time and then how to manage that income to deliver wider
strategic transport objectives.

Any future investment that funds/part funds the implementation of an/any RPS will reduce the
Clean Air Zone (CAZ) allocation listed within the below delivery plans. Additional kerbside
interventions will also be explored by utilising the space within RPS areas which could include
incorporating additional electric vehicle charging points and car club bays.

£700,000 has been allocated for RPS in Windmill Hill, Bedminster, and Totterdown through
Section 106 developer contributions. This also acts as match-funding for the South Bristol
Liveable Neighbourhoods programme supported by City Regional Sustainable Transport
Settlement (CRSTS).

Delivery Plan

The below delivery plans were developed based on the criteria identified at the 15 May
Transport and Connectivity Committee. The development work for the South Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood forms the basis of the first phase of RPS rollout as the project area aligns with
the previously published RPS areas in the outer ring as highlighted in blue in figure 1 (Ashton,
Bedminster West, Windmill Hill, Totterdown).

The second phase focuses on completing the outer ring in the north of the city in Ashley
Down, St Andrews and Bishopston. St Werburghs has been removed from high priority based
on councillor and resident feedback and replaced with a scheme to the east of the existing
Easton & St Phillips RPS which has been named Upper Easton. This is likely to cover the area

RPS expansion – October 2025 Page 47
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
around Stapleton Road but the proposed RPS boundaries will need to be agreed with local
stakeholders and the ward councillors before going out to further consultation

Proposals for further RPSs that are not currently identified by name in the below delivery plans
will come forward through applying the agreed prioritisation criteria and through avenues such
as councillor feedback and parking pressures through new developments. There is capacity to
initiate their development in 2027/28, but as the volume is not yet known costs have not yet
been modelled beyond this financial year.

The costs for implementing the RPS identified in the below delivery plans are estimates based
on bench marking from cities across the UK. However, the final costs are expected to vary
depending on the complexity and operational requirements of each RPS.

The council would look to review new RPS following a minimum of 12 months of the scheme
being fully operational

Parking charges on the downs

As laid out in a paper on RPS at the 2024 December Transport and Connectivity Committee
there are concerns that parking on the Downs is abused (particularly the 5 hour limited waiting
bays) resulting in limited turnover of spaces. There are also problems with van dwellers
parking all day around the Downs, although it should be noted that static caravans/unhitched
trailers cannot be issued a Penalty Charge Notice (PCN) as they are not registered vehicles.

Enforcement of the restrictions is challenging given the resources required to cover the whole
area and the nature of the restrictions which gives a very limited window of opportunity in
which to operate. The limited waiting restrictions apply Monday to Friday only, providing no
turnover of spaces on busy weekends. In addition, the 5-hour limit was agreed due to the
proximity to the Zoo and to reflect their desire for restrictions to accommodate Zoo visitors.

With the closure of the Zoo, it would be appropriate to review the existing restrictions and
develop an RPS in Henleaze and Westbury, and the detailed proposals will be subject to
consultation

2025/26 – delivery plan

Forecast
Scheme name Budget Work type
costs

CRSTS CAZ S106

Ashton Gate RPS
28,0
(subject to SBLN 28,000 Development
00
consultation)

Downs and
30,000 Development
Henleaze/Westbury

Luckwell RPS (subject to
32,000 32,000 Development
SBLN consultation)

Parson Street RPS
(subject to SBLN 20,000 20,000 Development
consultation)

RPS expansion – October 2025 Page 48
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Totterdown RPS (subject
10,000 20,000 30,000 Development
to SBLN consultation)

Windmill Hill RPS
20,0
(subject to SBLN 5,000 25,000 Development
00
consultation)

Total 80,000 45,000 40,000 165,000

2026/27 delivery plan

Forecast
Scheme name Budget Work type
costs

CRSTS CAZ S106

Ashley Down RPS 25,000 25,000 Development

Ashton Gate RPS
(subject to SBLN 280,000 330,000 610,000 Implementation
consultation)

Ashton Vale RPS
(subject to SBLN 25,000 25,000 Development
consultation)

Bishopston RPS 25,000 25,000 Development

Downs and Development/
100,000 100,000
Henleaze/Westbury Implementation

Luckwell RPS (subject to
370,000 150,000 520,000 Implementation
SBLN consultation)

Malago Vale RPS
(subject to SBLN 20,000 20,000 Development
consultation)

Parson Street RPS
(subject to SBLN 260,000 260,000 Implementation
consultation)

Perrett’s Park RPS
(subject to SBLN 25,000 25,000 Development
consultation)

St Andrews RPS 25,000 25,000 Development

Upper Easton RPS 20,000 20,000 Development

Totterdown RPS (subject
200,000 360,000 560,000 Implementation
to SBLN consultation)

Totterdown East RPS
(subject to SBLN 15,000 15,000 Development
consultation)

RPS expansion – October 2025 Page 49
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Windmill Hill RPS
300,0
(subject to SBLN 300,000 600,000 Implementation
00
consultation)

1,500,00
Total 675,000 660,000 2,830,000
0

2027/28 delivery plan

Forecast
Scheme name Budget Work type
costs

CRSTS CAZ S106

New RPS development 1 35,000 35,000 Development

New RPS development 2 35,000 35,000 Development

New RPS development 3 35,000 35,000 Development

St Werburghs RPS 35,000 35,000 Development

Ashley Down RPS 525,000 Implementation
525,000

Ashton Vale RPS
(subject to SBLN 250,000 250,000 Implementation
consultation)

Bishopston RPS 650,000 Implementation
650,000

Downs and Henleaze 500,000 500,000 Implementation

Malago Vale RPS
200,0
(subject to SBLN 200,000 Implementation
00
consultation)

Perrett’s Park RPS
200,0
(subject to SBLN 200,000 Implementation
00
consultation)

St Andrews RPS 680,000 Implementation
680,000

Upper Easton RPS 500,000 Implementation
500,000

Totterdown East RPS
180,0
(subject to SBLN 180,000 Implementation
00
consultation)

Total 3,825,000 3,825,000

Total Budget required CAZ allocation required

RPS expansion – October 2025 Page 50
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
25/26 delivery plan 165,000 45,000
26/27 delivery plan 2,830,000 675,000
27/28 delivery plan 3,825,000 3,825,000
Programme contingency (10%) 682,000 454,000
Total 7,502,000 4,999,000

Risks

There are a number of identified risks associated with the proposed expansion of the Resident
Parking Scheme (RPS). One key risk is the potential for local opposition in some areas; whilst
some residents may object to the principle, many will wish to ensure the detailed design is
appropriate. To mitigate this, a phased implementation approach allows for detailed
engagement with affected communities and refinement of proposals based on local feedback.
Where appropriate, consultation will be aligned with other related programmes, such as
Liveable Neighbourhoods, to ensure a coordinated and transparent approach.

A further risk relates to the Council’s capacity to enforce expanded RPS areas effectively. This
will be mitigated through appropriate resourcing and operational planning, supported by
revenue generated from permit income. This approach is intended to ensure that enforcement
remains effective and proportionate, without placing additional strain on existing services.

Another risk is that additional neighbourhoods will then become priorities due to becoming
proximate to one of the newly created RPS. This is mitigated by the delivery programme
anticipating that capacity will be needed for rolling additional zones.

Officer Recommendations:

1.That the Transport and Connectivity Committee approves the undertaking of development
and implementation work for the RPS areas identified in the delivery plans subject to the
necessary consultation and approvals.

2. That the Transport and Connectivity Committee approves the total allocation of £7,502,000
for the RPS expansion programme of which £4,999,000 will be allocated from CAZ for
development work and implementation of the areas identified in the delivery plans (subject to
the necessary consultation and approvals), with a presumption that this money will be
reimbursed to the CAZ funds.

3. Authorises the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration in consultation with the Chair of
the Transport and Connectivity Committee to award the project, in-line with the procurement
routes and maximum budget envelopes outlined in this report.

4.That the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration is authorised to progress scheme
development, including public consultation and permit system implementation consistent with
existing RPS.

Corporate Strategy alignment:

1.This proposal aligns with Bristol City Council’s Corporate Strategy by supporting sustainable
transport, improving environmental quality, enhancing road safety, and promoting equitable
access to neighbourhood spaces.

City Benefits:

RPS expansion – October 2025 Page 51
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
1.The RPS supports cleaner air and reduced congestion, particularly by managing commuter
parking and encouraging active travel and public transport patronage. This will improve health
outcomes, enhance social value through safer neighbourhoods, and promote environmental
sustainability aligned with Bristol’s Clean Air and Climate strategies. It will improve parking
availability for residents, reduce commuter parking overspill, enhance walking and cycling
safety, and contribute to cleaner air and greener neighbourhoods, advancing health, equality,
sustainability, and social value objectives.

Consultation Details:

1.Public engagement was conducted with residents and area users, identifying parking and
safety concerns around locations. Further consultations will be undertaken during detailed
scheme design.

Background Documents:
Cabinet 15 November 2007 - Expansion of the Central Controlled Parking Zones and
Introduction of Residents' Parking Schemes
Cabinet 27 June 2013 - Residents’ Parking Schemes
Cabinet 6 June 2023 - Residents Parking Scheme Policy Review
Transport and Connectivity Committee 15 May 2025 - Residents Parking Schemes Update

Revenue £ Source of Revenue
Cost Funding
Capital Cost £7,502,000 Source of Capital CRSTS, S106 and CAZ income
Funding
One off cost ☐ Ongoing Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving? N/A
cost ☒ OR Income generation proposal ☐

Professional comments section:

1. Finance Advice: This paper sets out the case for expanding Bristol City Council’s (BCC)
Resident Parking Schemes (RPS) programme (formerly Resident Parking Zones). This
report is requesting the use of £7.5 million across financial years 25/26, 26/27 and 27/28 for
the development and implementation of several resident parking schemes across Bristol.

The report proposes the use of £1.7 million of CRSTS funding from the South Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood scheme, £0.8 million in section 106 receipts and £5 million from CAZ income.
Each of these estimates is inclusive of 10% of contingency. The Scheme is expected to
become financially self-sustaining over time and potentially generate a surplus of between
£100,000 and £300,000 per year per RPS, with revenue from the schemes reinvested to
repay the original CAZ investment as well as potentially rolling out future RPS and/or
transport improvements across the city.

Finance recognises a risk that the combined authority doesn’t approve the South Bristol
Liveable Neighbourhood scheme and that the funding shortfall would need to be covered

RPS expansion – October 2025 Page 52
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
using further CAZ funding. The section 106 receipts have been agreed with the section 106
team.
It is estimated by the team that the CAZ funding will be replenished in the medium term with
the additional income to be received from the resident parking schemes, however finance
has not seen calculations to quantify the timeframe for this replenishment. For the time being,
CAZ funding is available to be used for this scheme, however work is currently being done
to model CAZ income to be received over coming years. Clarity is also needed around
income utilisation within transport, once the scheme starts generating surplus income.

Finance Business Partner: Vivi Sargioti, Finance Business Partner – Growth &
Regeneration, 01 October 2025

2. Legal Advice:

Resident Parking Schemes are promoted under the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 (the
Act). Matters to be considered when determining what parking places are to be designated
include (but are not limited to) both the interests of traffic and those of the owners and
occupiers of adjoining property. In particular the Council shall have regard to:

(a)the need for maintaining the free movement of traffic;
(b)the need for maintaining reasonable access to premises; and
(c)the extent to which off-street parking accommodation is available in the neighbourhood or
the provision of such parking accommodation is likely to be encouraged there by the
designation of parking places under this section.

Appropriate surveys and public consultation should therefore be undertaken to inform the
scheme design to be promoted and to satisfy the various legislative considerations to be
taken into account when formalising proposals for a scheme.

The Act and accompanying regulations also set out the public consultation requirements
following the promotion of a scheme and prior to implementation, and these should be
followed.

Caselaw has clarified that the Act is not a revenue raising Act and, in deciding whether or
not to make an order that allows for parking charges for on-road parking, a local authority
should not have regard to the manner in which the legislation would permit any surplus
charges to be spent.

Legal Team Leader: Dawn Bodill – Specialist Solicitor. 26 September 2025.

3. Implications on IT: There are no IT implications

IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson, Lead Enterprise Architects, August 2025

4. HR Advice: There are no HR implications evident

HR Partner: Celia Williams, HR Business Partner, 25 August 2025

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal NO

RPS expansion – October 2025 Page 53
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) YES

Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment NO

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

RPS expansion – October 2025 Page 54
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Equality Impact Assessment [version 3.1]

Refer to EqIA Step by Step Guide for advice on completing this assessment
Title: RPS September
Type of proposal: Service Status: Changing
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Adam Crowther
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Head of City Transport

Step 1: What do we want to do?

What is the purpose of the proposal?
The proposal seeks to introduce a Resident Parking Scheme (RPS) in targeted areas across Bristol such as
Bristol Ashton Vale , Bedminster , Malago Vale, Perrett Park & Totterdown East, Totterdown, Windmill
Hill to do the following. This outlines how the implementation of RPSs can support BCC in better
managing parking to prioritise more sustainable uses of the kerbside, reduce private vehicle trips, and
enhance safety and environmental quality across all wards.

RPS expansion is being proposed now to help tackle increasing pressure on parking, support cleaner air,
and make neighbourhoods safer and fairer for everyone.
The proposed expansion of the RPS programme directly supports Bristol’s wider strategic goals,
including the ambitions set out in the One City Plan.

By helping to reduce car use, lower traffic volumes, and make it easier for people to choose walking,
cycling, or public transport, the scheme plays an important role in the city’s aspirations to become
carbon neutral by 2030. It also supports the aims of reducing carbon emissions by cutting down on
commuter traffic and improving air quality in residential areas.

In 2023, BCC commissioned a review of RPS effectiveness to better align the scheme with wider ‘Liveable
Neighbourhoods’ objectives. These include promoting more sustainable uses of kerbside space and
reducing private vehicle use. Liveable Neighbourhood boundaries provide a logical framework for RPS
implementation, offering operational alignment and delivering shared outcomes.

Manage high parking demand

Reduce congestion and improve air quality

Enhance safety for all road users

Improve access for residents, particularly those with mobility needs

The scheme is aligned with Bristol City Council’s commitments under the Climate Emergency
Declaration, Transport Strategy, and Equality and Inclusion Strategy (2023–2027).

Page 55
OFFICIAL
Who will be affected?
☐ Bristol City Council workforce ☒ Service users ☒ The wider community
☐ Commissioned services ☒ City partners / Stakeholder organisations

Will the proposal have an equality impact?
☒ Yes ☐ No
If ‘Yes’ complete steps 2-4 below. If ‘No’ explain how you know there will be no equality impact:

Step 2: What information do we have? [complete if ‘Yes’ to an equality impact]

What data or evidence is there about who could be affected?

Data / Evidence Source Summary of what this tells us
[Include a reference where known]
Bristol City Council Parking Surveys Show peak pressure in wards with limited off-street parking and
(2022–2024) high commuter inflows.

Resident Consultation Feedback Concerns raised around permit costs, visitor access, and
(2023) arrangements for Blue Badge holders.

Indices of Multiple Deprivation Identified pockets of deprivation within proposed scheme
(IMD) 2019 zones.

Equalities Consultation Log Records of engagement with Disabled people forums, carers’
networks, older people’s organisations, and youth councils.

Transport for All & Inclusive Best practice on accessible street design and parking policy.
Transport Strategy Guidance

Additional comments: High proportion of Older residents in certain zones (15%+ aged 70+), with
mobility needs that could be impacted by changes.

Above-average proportion of Disabled residents in some affected wards (c. 12–14%), including reliance
on carers and regular medical visits.

Lower car ownership rates in deprived areas, yet possible increased permit burden on those who do
own cars.

Page 56
OFFICIAL
Higher ethnic diversity in certain wards; cultural and religious practices may influence travel and
parking patterns.

The below table is evidencing the car parking in the areas the Core hours and the number of permits
available currently.

Scheme Name Ward Area No. of Cars or Core hours No. of free No. of
(km2) streets vans per of operation visitor chargeable
household1 (Mon-Fri or permits visitor
Mon-Sat) permits

Ashton Vale Bedminster 0.79 17 1.23 09:00-17:00 30 30
Bedminster 1 Bedminster 0.33 26 1.07 09:00-17:00 20 20
Bedminster 2 Bedminster 0.25 12 1.27 09:00-17:00 25 25
Bedminster 3 Bedminster 0.13 18 1.00 09:00-17:00 20 20
Bedminster 4 Bedminster 0.22 18 1.19 09:00-17:00 15 15
Bedminster 5 Bedminster 0.10 17 0.84 09:00-17:00 20 20
Bedminster 6 Bedminster 0.21 36 0.83 09:00-17:00 25 25
Malago Vale Windmill 0.33 21 1.04 09:00-17:00 30 30
Hill
Perrett Park Windmill 0.33 30 0.99 09:00-17:00 40 40
& Totterdown Hill
East
Totterdown Windmill 0.13 21 0.91 08:00-18:00 20 20
Hill
Windmill Hill Windmill 0.64 42 1.10 08:00-18:00 50 50
Hill

Do you have relevant diversity data for the following protected characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☒ Gender Reassignment
☒ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☐ Pregnancy/Maternity ☐ Race
☒ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☒ Sexual Orientation

Page 57
OFFICIAL
Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
Yes — Limited direct feedback from pregnant residents, faith groups, and informal carers. More
engagement to follow with the team doing letter drops and drop ins for the community with regular
feedback sessions.

No current disaggregated data on permit affordability impacts by household income.

How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
Engagement for new RPS happened previously in 2013 to 2016 before being put on hold, papers were in
public domain. No further engagement has happened yet apart from a few public meetings with
residents in some of the areas for RPS. Community meetings will be taking place shortly and the PM ,
Design and Engagement team are kicking some meetings off on the 11/09/25 with door to door and site
meeting at Ashton Gate.

There has been perceptions survey around the South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhoods (SBLN) that links
with the RPS and this was sent to key stakeholders in early January 2024 with two reminders. These
responses were recorded. In terms of ambitions for the project, the below three categories were seen as
most important to respondents (either ‘essential’ or ‘high importance’):
• streets that are easy to cross
• good access and parking
• easy, convenient and safe to walk

A summary of the results of the engagement is as follows for the SBLN as below:
The interactive map received 6,081 comments from 1,562 different users between 5 July and 30 October
2024. On a separate survey, we received 513 submissions. These have been considered separately but
have been reported to the relevant designing team. The points plotted on the map are as follows:

People categorised their comments into the following issues and are ranked in order of highest number
of comments:
• Speeding traffic
• Problems with car parking
• Not safe for people cycling
• Lack of crossings
• Personal safety/security concerns

Page 58
OFFICIAL
• Narrow pavements
• Poor accessibility for wheelchairs, prams and pushchairs
• Air pollution
• Not enough green space
• Lack of bus services

Alongside the original comments, contributors have been asked to provide potential solutions to the
issues they were raising. These were:
• Safe crossings and junctions
• Wider/clearer pavement
• Priority access to walking
• Managing unsafe vehicle speeds
• Cycle hangars
• Priority to people cycling and pedestrians at side roads

How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
Ongoing dialogue through public meetings, online surveys, and stakeholder workshops in the areas
where RPS will be taking place. Engagement for these measures will utilise a variety of methods to
ensure meaningful community involvement. These may include drop-in events, surveys, workshops, and
online platforms to gather a broad range of feedback. For example, engagement on the Totterdown
Square RPS could follow a co-design approach piloted in the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood project,
where early community feedback was actively used to shape design options. This collaborative model
ensures that local residents and businesses have a genuine influence on scheme development, helping
to build trust and create solutions tailored to local needs. This EqIA will be updated throughout the life
of the project to reflect consultation feedback and outcomes of them.

Step 3: Who might the proposal impact? [complete if ‘Yes’ to an equality impact]

Could the proposal affect people disproportionately because of their characteristics?
GENERAL COMMENTS
See Below Characteristic / Group Potential Impact Mitigation / Action

PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Young drivers/students may face reduced access to street parking; possible
disproportionate effect on those in shared housing.
Mitigations: Focus on communications targeting younger demographics; consider exceptions
where relevant, Flexible visitor permits for multi-occupancy homes, targeted
communication via youth channels.
Age: Older People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Some Older residents may have mobility challenges affecting permit use or
enforcement impact. Older people may be more likely to face difficulties with
online applications, physical permit collection, and walking longer distances
Mitigations: Provide concessions, easy application processes, and accessible permit distribution,
provide offline and in-person application options, ensure nearest-possible bay
allocation for mobility needs, offer clear large-print guidance.

Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Page 59
OFFICIAL
Potential impacts: Risk of reduced parking access if bays are reallocated; reliance on close-proximity
parking for mobility and medical needs.
Mitigations: Full exemption for Blue Badge holders, additional Disabled bays, consult local,
Disabled people groups on design, we will also include other ways of
communication to help the understanding of the project.

Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: No clear disproportionate impact identified.
Mitigations:
Sexual orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: No clear disproportionate impact identified.
Mitigations:
Pregnancy / Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Maternity
Potential impacts: Pregnant residents may require more frequent vehicle access or parking flexibility,
Need for closer parking to home, particularly late in pregnancy or with infants
Mitigations: Include flexible permit options or temporary exemptions, expedited processing
Gender Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
reassignment
Potential impacts: No clear disproportionate impact identified.
Mitigations:
Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Race / Ethnicity Potential indirect impact if communication not accessible in
multiple languages; cultural/religious parking needs (e.g., worship times).
Mitigations: Continued outreach to minority ethnic communities, provide scheme materials in
key community languages, consult faith leaders on event/venue parking.

Religion or Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Belief
Potential impacts: No clear disproportionate impact identified.
Mitigations:
Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
civil partnership
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS
Socio-economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: Permit cost could be a financial barrier for low-income households; risk of reducing
mobility for work or care responsibilities
Mitigations: Sliding-scale permit fees, payment instalment plans, promote active travel
alternatives with subsidy options.

Care Experienced Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: No clear disproportionate impact identified.
Mitigations:
Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Carers may need flexible parking arrangements due to travel demands; Carers
Regular home visits could be disrupted without flexible arrangements
Mitigations: Issue discretionary carer permits tied to care recipient’s address.
Other groups
Page 60
OFFICIAL
Potential impacts: None
Mitigations:

Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their characteristics?
Yes — improved parking availability and safety for residents, potential environmental benefits from
reduced congestion, and tailored support for vulnerable groups.

Step 4: Impact [complete if ‘Yes’ to an equality impact]

Has this equality impact assessment led to any changes?
Benefits for Protected Groups
Improved parking availability for residents, reducing stress and safety risks.

Better enforcement preventing commuter overspill parking in residential areas.

Cleaner air and quieter streets, supporting health outcomes for vulnerable groups.

Equity focus in design to ensure vulnerable residents are not disadvantaged.

Action Plan
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale
Provide discretionary permits or exemptions for carers. TBC TBC

Create carer and temporary pregnancy permit policy Service Lead –
Parking 2 months before

Implement income-sensitive permit pricing model Parking Services
Lead 3 months before launch Permit uptake.

Implement outreach plan to engage underrepresented TBC TBC
communities

Develop inclusive communications plan (multi-language, accessible
formats)

Review and adjust permit pricing to consider low-income TBC TBC
households

Establish stakeholder forum with Disabled people, carers, and
Black, Asian and minority ethnic community reps

Introduce flexible permit options for carers and pregnant resident

How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
Ongoing Minutes and feedback recorded quarterly by the PM.

Annual review of equality impacts and mitigations EqIA Review Panel 12 months post-launch EqIA
update and public report.

Quarterly data analysis on permit uptake by demographic group.
Page 61
OFFICIAL
Complaint and compliment tracking by theme and protected characteristic.

Post-implementation survey at 12 months with targeted outreach to vulnerable groups.

Annual EqIA refresh to ensure mitigations remain effective.

Step 5: Review
Equality and Inclusion Team Review Director Sign-Off:

Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team Alex Hearn
Date: 30/09/2025 Date: 13/10/2025

Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.

Page 62
OFFICIAL
Environmental Impact Assessment [version 1.0]

Proposal title: RPS programme expansion
Project stage and type: ☒ Initial Idea Mandate ☐ Outline Business Case ☐ Full Business Case
☒ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☒ New ☐ Changing
☐ Other [please state] ☐ Already exists / review
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Adam Crowther
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Head of City Transport

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of this Environmental Impact Assessment is to help you develop your proposal in a way that is
compliant with the council’s policies and supports the council’s strategic objectives under the One City Climate
Strategy, the One City Ecological Emergency Strategy and the latest Corporate Strategy.
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the project proposal process by someone with a good
knowledge of the project, the service area that will deliver it, and sufficient influence over the proposal to make
changes as needed.
It is good practice to take a team approach to completing the Environmental Impact Assessment. See further
guidance on completing this document. Please email environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk early for advice
and feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Please use plain English, avoiding jargon and
acronyms.
The aim of this proposal is to introduce or revise a Resident Parking Scheme (RPS) in selected areas of Bristol. The
RPS seeks to prioritise residential access to limited kerbbside parking, manage demand for space, reduce
commuter parking, encourage sustainable transport use, and improve local air quality. This supports Bristol’s aim
to transition to a net-zero carbon, car-light city while creating safer, healthier, and more accessible
neighbourhoods

1.2 Will the proposal have an environmental impact?
Could the proposal have either a positive or negative effects for the environment now or in the future? If ‘No’
explain why you are sure there will be no environmental impact, then skip steps 2-3 and request review by sending
this form to environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk

If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment.
☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

1.3 If the proposal is part of an options appraisal, has the environmental impact of each option
been assessed and included in the recommendation-making process?
If ‘Yes’ please ensure that the details of the environmental impacts of each option are made clear in the pros and
cons section of the project management options appraisal document.

☒ Yes ☐ No ☐ Not applicable [please select]

If ‘No’ explain why environmental impacts have not been considered as part of the options appraisal process.
Page 63
OFFICIAL
Step 2: What kinds of environmental impacts might the project have?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying
potential impacts.

Does the proposal create any benefits for the environment, or have any adverse impacts?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our corporate environmental objectives and the wider One City Climate and Ecological Emergency
strategies.
Consider how the proposal creates environmental impacts in the following categories, both now and in the future.
Reasonable efforts should be made to quantify stated benefit or adverse impacts wherever possible.

Where the proposal is likely to have a beneficial impact, consider what actions would enhance those impacts. Where
the proposal is likely to have a harmful impact, consider whether actions would mitigate these impacts.

Enhancements or mitigation actions are only required when there is a likely impact identified. Remember that where
enhancements or mitigation actions are listed, they should be assigned to staff and appropriately resourced.

GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many categories)
An RPS in Bristol can bring substantial environmental benefits but must be managed carefully to avoid unintended
consequences (e.g. displacement of vehicles to boundary areas or increased traffic in neighbouring zones). Close
integration with active travel infrastructure and local transport planning is essential

ENV1 Carbon neutral: Reduction in car dependency and commuter parking.
Emissions of climate Encourages modal shift to public transport, cycling, and walking.
changing gases Helps manage traffic volumes and congestion.
Supports the net zero targets for council operations
Benefits
BCC has committed to
achieving net zero emissions
for its direct activities by
2025, and to support the city
in achieving net zero by Pair RPS with improved cycling infrastructure and public transport
2030. routes.
Offer low-emission vehicle permit discounts or exclusions.
Will the proposal involve Enhancing Engage in communications to encourage transport behaviour change.
transport, or the use of actions Integrate with mobility hubs, EV charging, and car club spaces.
energy in buildings? Will the
proposal involve the
purchase of goods or
services? If the answer is yes Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
to either of these questions, Vehicle displacement to surrounding, uncontrolled areas.
there will be a carbon Increase in driving time from drivers searching for free parking
impact. Adverse elsewhere.
impacts
Consider the scale and
timeframe of the impact,

Page 64
OFFICIAL
particularly if the proposal Expand RPS areas in coordinated phases to limit displacement.
will lead to ongoing Monitor boundary effects and adjust permit zones as needed.
emissions beyond the 2025
Mitigating
and 2030 target dates.
actions

Further guidance
☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☒ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Reduction in pollution from vehicle traffic can improve nearby green
ENV2 Ecological recovery:
spaces.
Wildlife and habitats
Potential reallocation of curbside space for pocket parks, planters, or
BCC has committed to 30%
Benefits biodiversity corridors.
of its land being managed
Reduction in surface runoff pollution via less road wear and fewer
for nature and to halve its
vehicles.
use of pesticides by 2030.
Implement green infrastructure (e.g. rain gardens or tree pits) in
Consider how your proposal
areas with removed parking.
can support increased space
Enhancing Re-wilding redundant parking bays.
for nature, reduced use of
actions
pesticides, reduce pollution
to waterways, and reduce
consumption of products
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☒ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
that undermine ecosystems
Possible loss of roadside verge if converted into formalised parking
around the world.
bays.
If your proposal will directly Adverse
lead to a reduction in habitat impacts
within Bristol, then consider
how your proposed
mitigation can lead to a Avoid converting permeable areas into tarmac.
biodiversity net gain. Be sure Prioritise landscaping in scheme design.
to refer to quantifiable
Mitigating
changes wherever possible. actions

Further guidance
☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☒ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Reduction in road maintenance due to fewer vehicles.
Digital permit systems reduce reliance on printed materials.
ENV3 A cleaner, low-waste
Potential to de-clutter streets of signage with smart permit zones.
city: Consumption of Benefits
resources and generation of
waste

Reduction in road maintenance due to fewer vehicles.
Digital permit systems reduce reliance on printed materials.
Enhancing Potential to de-clutter streets of signage with smart permit zones.
Consider what resources will
actions
be used as a result of the
proposal, how they can be
minimised or swapped for
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☒ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Page 65
OFFICIAL
less impactful ones, where Infrastructure installation (signage, road markings) may require
they will be sourced from, material input and waste generation.
and what will happen to any Adverse
waste generated impacts

Minimise physical interventions where possible.
Use reusable or recyclable components where possible.
Mitigating
actions
Further guidance

☐ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☒ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Reduced car use can lead to cooler microclimates (lower urban heat
effect).
ENV4 Climate resilience:
Less vehicle pollution reduces heat impact in vulnerable populations.
Bristol’s resilience to the Benefits
effects of climate change

Bristol’s climate is already
changing, and increasingly Include greening or shading features in the scheme design.
frequent instances of Prioritise tree planting or shaded walking routes where space is
extreme weather will Enhancing reallocated where possible.
become more likely over actions
time.

Consider how the proposal
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
will perform during periods
of extreme weather increased impermeable surfaces if new bays are created with tarmac.
(particularly heat and
Adverse
flooding).
impacts

Consider if the proposal will
reduce or increase risk to Use permeable surfacing in new parking layouts
people and assets during
extreme weather events.
Mitigating
actions
Further guidance
☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☒ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Improved air quality by reducing vehicle presence.
Noise reduction in residential streets.
Statutory duty:
Benefits Decreased risk of heat and pollution from fewer idling vehicles.
Prevention of Pollution to
air, water, or land
Monitor air quality
Engage with the public
Enhancing
Publish and promote public-facing reports.
Consider how the proposal actions
Use the RPS as a platform to promote anti-idling campaigns.
will change the likelihood of
pollution occurring to air,
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years

Page 66
OFFICIAL
water, or land and what Displaced parking may increase emissions in neighbouring areas
steps will be taken to Some residents may complain if we haven’t engaged with the public
Adverse
prevent pollution occurring. impacts enough

Integrated monitoring and iterative zone adjustments.
Consider air quality sensors.
Mitigating
actions Engage earlier with the general public
Further guidance
☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☒ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Step 3: Action Plan
Use this section summarise and assign responsibility for any actions you have identified to improve data, enhance
beneficial, or mitigate negative impacts. Actions identified in section two can be grouped together if named
responsibility is under the same person.
This action plan should be updated at each stage of the project. Please be aware that the Sustainable City and
Climate Change Service may use this action plan as an audit checklist during the project’s implementation or
operation.
Enhancing / mitigating action required Responsible Officer Timescale
Coordinate RPS with sustainable transport links and cycling routes Pre Implementation
where possible.
Phase zone rollout to monitor and mitigate parking displacement 3-6 months
with a structured time- line.
Specify low-impact materials for signage and markings where Design Stage
possible
Deploy tree and rain gardens where possible Design and
Implementation
Stage
Monitor air quality before/after implementation. Implementation
Use digital/app-based permit systems to reduce waste. Implementation

Step 4: Review
The Sustainable City and Climate Change Service need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your
impact assessment. Assessments should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for
decision-makers on the environmental impact of the proposal.
Please seek feedback and review by emailing environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk before final submission of
your decision pathway documentation1.
Where impacts identified in this assessment are deemed significant, they will be summarised here by the Sustainable
City and Climate Change Service and must be included in the ‘evidence base’ section of the decision pathway cover
sheet.

Summary of significant beneficial impacts and opportunities to support the Climate, Ecological and Corporate
Strategies (ENV1,2,3,4):

1 Review by the Sustainable City and Climate Change Service confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers
to consider the likely environmental impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
Page 67
OFFICIAL
Reduced transport emissions, Improved local air quality, Opportunities for re-greening urban space, Reduced
resource use and waste, Reduced Vehicle idling noise pollution and heat

Summary of significant adverse impacts and how they can be mitigated:
Potential adverse impacts include parking displacement and material use during scheme implementation. These
can be mitigated through design controls, tight PM ownership and monitoring. We must monitor and Review: The
environmental performance of RPS must be monitored over time—especially air quality and vehicle numbers.
Public Engagement: Residents must be engaged on both mobility behaviour and ecological outcomes.
Data-Driven Adjustments: Use evidence to iterate and expand the scheme in phases.
Multi-Function Team Coordination: Ensure that transport, environment, and planning teams are working
together from the outset with no nasty surprises.

Environmental Performance Team Reviewer: Submitting author:
Adam Crowther
Environmental Performance Team Reviewer

Date: 13/10/2025 Date: 13/10/2025

Page 68
OFFICIAL
Agenda Item 9

Committee Report

KEY DECISION OR FOR INFORMATION: Key decision affects 2 or more wards

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 23 October 2025

TITLE: CAZ Exemption and Financial Support package

Ward(s): Hotwells & Harbourside
Central

Officer presenting the report: Adam Crowther Job title: Head of Strategic City Transport

Committee Chair: Councillor Ed Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: BCC Staff

Purpose of Report:

1. To seek approval of a time limited exemption package for eligible citizens with Clean Air
Zone (CAZ) non-compliant vehicles impacted by the introduction of a Bus Lane and Bus
Gate on Queens Road and Park Street as described in this report. The report will also be
highlighting the existing CAZ financial support scheme available to citizens impacted by the
installation of the Bus Lane and Bus Gate. The exemption would be initially limited to one
year from the Bus Lane and Bus Gate opening at the Northern end of Park St and be for
eligible citizens in the area (set out in Figure 1 below and Appendix A2) that would otherwise
be forced to drive through the CAZ and incur the charge or drive through the Bus Lane and
Bus Gate. This is referred to as the “preferred option” throughout this report. This exemption
will be kept under review after the first year.

Figure 1 below identifies the area between the Northern end of Park Street (where the Bus
Lane and Bus Gate are proposed) and the CAZ boundary which is to the south of Great
George Street. Citizens who need to access this area will, under the current proposals, be
required to pay a CAZ charge if they have a CAZ non-compliant vehicle.

Officers have considered how to mitigate this impact and as a result this Committee paper
sets out a proposal to offer an exemption through the Bus Lane and Bus Gate.

Figure 1:
Template approved March 25
Page 69
OFFICIAL
Evidence Base

1. The boundary of the CAZ is currently on Park Street to the south of the junction with Great
George Street (see Appendix A1). This means that anyone who needs to access the area
to the north of the boundary can currently do so from the top of Park Street via Queens Road,
thus avoiding paying the CAZ charge.

2. The consequence of the proposed Bus Lane and Bus Gate intervention (see Appendix A1)
as part of the City Region Sustainable Transport Settlement (CRSTS) Park
Street/Triangle/Queens Road proposals is that those citizens who need to access the area
will need to travel through the CAZ via St Georges Road, thus incurring a charge if they have
a CAZ non-compliant vehicle. The bus gate intervention is necessary for the removal of the
through traffic on Park Street which is a key requirement of the scheme to realise
improvements to bus journey times & reliability, active travel and public realm.

3. In response to this, the Council is proposing a package of initially time limited exemptions to
enable, as far as reasonably practicable, access through the Bus Lane and Bus Gate at the
top of Park Street for those eligible citizens who have a CAZ non-compliant vehicle. In
addition, citizens will be able to access the existing CAZ financial support scheme, more
details of which can be found on Bristol City Councils website: Clean Air Zone financial
support

4. The CAZ has been in operation since November 2022 and has achieved a 10% reduction in
NO2 emissions across Bristol and 13% lower in the CAZ. Almost 9 out of 10 journeys in the
CAZ are now compliant. The map in Figure 1 shows those properties that would be eligible
for the temporary Bus Lane and Bus Gate exemption if their vehicles are CAZ non-compliant.
The area consists of 438 properties. Of which 270 are residential and 168 are commercial.

Template approved March 25
Page 70
OFFICIAL
5. The following groups of Citizens will be eligible for an exemption through the Bus Lane and
Bus Gate if they have a CAZ non-compliant vehicle:
• Residents in the area defined in Figure 1
• Visitors to these residential properties (including delivery drivers and tradespeople)
where these are known to the resident
• Vehicles belonging to businesses operating from properties within the area defined
in Figure 1. These are operational vehicles insured for business use and will not
cover staff/commuters
• Informal carers
• Professional carers

These are the citizens (local residents and businesses) who are most significantly impacted by
the proposed scheme and is why we are advising the preferred option in this paper.

Other groups who may be impacted but will not be eligible for an exemption (but who will be
able to access the existing CAZ financial support scheme) include:
• Business owners/employees (commuters)
• Customers/delivery drivers/tradespeople visiting the area
• Visitors to St Georges Hall
• The Georgian House Museum
• Brandon Hill Park
• Blue Badge holders

There is no easy way to identify these citizens. These citizens have the option to pay the daily
CAZ fee or park outside of the CAZ; for example, West End car park which is 500m away from
St Georges Hall as well as the new disabled parking bays proposed on Triangle South which
are about 350m away from St Georges Hall.

6. Alternative options have been considered, and these are set out below. Appendix A3
provides a summary of the different users impacted by the “preferred option” and the
proposed exemption and financial support measures. The financial support measures are
under review to be expanded to offer more citizens the potential of taking advantage of the
financial support. The current threshold for being prioritised for financial support is £30,000
and is currently under review to keep in pace with inflation.

7. Citizens who live or work within the boundary identified in Figure 1 have been sent
communications prior to this Committee Meeting setting out the preferred option, along with
details of the package of exemptions and the financial support available. Subject to the
outcome of this Committee Paper, the next step is to consult on the draft traffic regulation
orders (TROs) in late quarter three/early quarter four of the 2025/2026 financial year.

8. The Equalities Impact Assessment (EQIA) is covered by the following EQIAs: Clean Air Zone
EQIA 2022 and the CRSTS A37/A4018 Work Package 3 - Park Street, Triangle and Queens
Road EQIA. These EQIA’s completed are shared as appendices of this committee paper,
and protected characteristics will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis in line with the
exemption application process. Blue Badge holders visiting the defined area in Figure 1, for
example visiting St George’s Hall, with CAZ non-compliant vehicles will have West End Car
Park as an alternative which is 500m away from St George’s Hall. In addition, new disabled
parking is proposed on Triangle South is about 350m away from St Georges Hall. Both West
Template approved March 25
Page 71
OFFICIAL
End Car Park and Triangle South are accessible without driving through the CAZ or the Bus
Lane or Bus Gate on the Northern end of Park St. Finally, there’s the financial support
measures that are on offer, for which all Blue Badge holders are prioritised.

Alternative options considered:

1. Do Nothing
An alternative option to do nothing was considered. As a result, non-compliant vehicles
would need to access the area via St George's Road and would incur the CAZ Charge.
The main reason this option was not pursued was the risk of the Council being subject to
legal challenge for forcing residents to pay the CAZ charge if they own non-compliant
cars. It would have the possibility of attracting negative publicity and complaints from
those who are disadvantaged by the scheme. The position would have to be maintained
even in the event of adverse publicity. More positively this option could encourage more
people to upgrade their vehicle to a compliant one and or encourage modal shift. This
could also deter drivers of non-compliant vehicles from visiting the area. This option was
not pursued further due to the preferred option being able to mitigate the negatives of this
option.
2. Temporary time limited Bus Lane and Bus Gate Exemption for compliant and
non-compliant CAZ
An option for a temporary time limited Bus Lane and Bus Gate exemption for compliant
and non-compliant CAZ vehicles to qualifying citizens in the affected catchment was
considered. It is recommended that this option isn’t pursued because of implications for
enforcement, the additional administrative work required, and setting a precedent.
3. Business CPZ (Central Parking Zone) permanent permit
An option to create a Business CPZ using the existing CPZ permits in the affected area
as the basis for grounds for exemption. This option was not pursued as it would create a
permanent CAZ exemption setting a new precedent where all CAZ exemptions have
previously been temporary. They have been temporary with the hope of giving time to
citizens to explore alternative modes of transport or switch over to CAZ compliant
vehicles. This option would create a long-term need of BCC resource to administer, and
monitor said exemptions as resident move in and out of the catchment.
4. CAZ Exemption
A CAZ exemption was considered to allow access through the CAZ for Non-compliant
vehicle in the catchment that would be forced to drive through the CAZ or Bus Gate. This
exemption would open access to all of the CAZ for non-compliant vehicles to ensure that
they are not financially penalised by the scheme. This option would undermine the CAZ
and cause detrimental impacts to the council’s obligations to achieve CAZ compliance in
the shortest time possible. Setting up this exemption would be difficult to implement for
all use cases and poses the question if we cannot offer exemption to all should it be
offered to any. There would be a large cost and time pressure added to the Parking Team
and would have long term effect on the team’s resources and is not recommended.
5. Bus Lane and Bus Gate Removal
Template approved March 25
Page 72
OFFICIAL
An option to remove the Bus Lane and Bus Gate from the top of Park Street was
considered. This option would have a significant impact on reducing the benefits of the
scheme. This would encourage the retention of the status quo allowing through traffic
down Park St, making this a non-viable option.
6. Bus Gate Relocation
An option to relocate the Bus Gate further down Park St to facilitate access for the citizens
with non-compliant vehicles affected by the current location of the Bus Gate. With the
objective of keeping the through traffic off Park St, this would still reduce the benefits of
the scheme by drawing more vehicles onto Park St. They would be given access to park,
load and have a negative impact on the buses and cyclists with the increased movement.
Therefore, this is not a recommended option.
7. Delay Implementation
An option to delay the implementation of the scheme until after the CAZ is
decommissioned was considered. This would result in the CRSTS funding of the scheme
no longer viable and no longer buildable within its allocated funding timeframe. The
benefits of the scheme would be delayed. The date of CAZ being decommissioned is
unknown, and it is unknown as to whether a different scheme will follow on from the
decommissioning of CAZ. Therefore, this is not a viable option to explore further.

Officer Recommendations: -

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:

1. Approves the preferred option of offering a time limited exemption, one year from date of
opening of the Bus Lane and Bus Gate, and financial support package for those eligible
citizens with non-compliant vehicles who are impacted by the introduction of a Bus Lane and
Bus Gate at the Northern end of Park Street.

Corporate Strategy alignment:

The proposal contained within this report is aimed at addressing an issue with the wider Park
Street/Triangle/Queens Road Project. This Project aligns with Corporate Strategy Priority 4
“Making it easier, greener and safer to travel into and around Bristol, and Priority 5 “Accelerating
climate action and nature recovery. By improving public transport infrastructure, the reliability of
bus services is improved, and opportunity to increase frequency and facilitate additional services
is safeguarded. Making improvements to walking and cycling infrastructure will encourage the
uptake of active travel. By considering the residents directly disadvantaged by the scheme and
offering them financial support and time to change their vehicles and modes of transport. The
project team are ensuring an equitable Bristol during the transition to fulfilling priority 4 and
priority 5.

City Benefits:

1. The proposal to retain the bus gate in its existing location will lock in the wider benefits of
the Park Street/Triangle/Queens Road scheme.
2. The package of exemptions will benefit those qualifying citizens who have a CAZ non-
compliant vehicle.
Template approved March 25
Page 73
OFFICIAL
Consultation Details:

1. Member Consultation: Briefed Policy Chair for Transport and Connectivity Committee on 7
August and 15 September 2025. Attended Policy Committee Chair Briefing on 18
September.

2. Internal Consultation: Discussions with relevant teams including Parking Services, Local
Transport Team, Communication and Engagement Team have taken place prior to and
during the production of this Committee paper.

3. Public Consultation: The proposal set out in this report has been communicated to citizens
in advance of the 23 October Transport and Connectivity Committee meeting.

4. Statutory Consultation: If the preferred option is supported by the Transport and
Connectivity Committee, statutory consultation is intended to commence in late quarter
three/early quarter four of the 2025/2026 financial year

Background Documents:

1. 20 March 2025 Transport and Connectivity Committee - A37/A4018 Workpackage 3 Park
Street/Triangle/Queens Road: Committee Report Template - College Green et al Final.pdf

Revenue £ Source of Revenue
Cost Funding
Capital Cost £ Source of Capital
Funding
One off cost ☐ Ongoing Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving? N/A
cost ☒ OR Income generation proposal ☐

Cost estimates from Parking Services are as follows c£15K for initial set up of back-office
systems, c£5K for staff time in the first 3 months and c£7,500 for business support across the
first 8-12 weeks totalling to about c£27.5k Costs can be absorbed within the Project budget if
required. Thereafter, any going work likely to be absorbed within existing establishment and no
other costs incurred.

Professional comments section:

1. Finance Advice: This report is requesting a package of time-limited exemptions for the
proposed bus gate and lane on Park Street. As part of development of work package 3 of
the Stockwood to Henbury Corridor programme, it has been identified that the closing of Park
Street to cars would mean that some residents would be forced to enter the CAZ. As a result,
rather than change the scheme, this report is suggesting a one-year exemption from bus
gate / lane charges for residents. It is estimated that it will cost approximately £15,000 in
revenue costs for initial set up, approximately £5,000 of additional capital recharges for
system set up and consultancy costs and £7,500 for business support across the first 8-12
weeks. It is however noted that these are internal estimates based on staff time multiplied by
anticipated employee grade, alongside high-level estimates for external costs. No estimate
for reduction in CAZ income as a result of these exemptions is available, however it is not
expected to be material.
Template approved March 25
Page 74
OFFICIAL
The scheme avoids redesigning the infrastructure and mitigates legal and reputational risks.

Finance Business Partner: Vivi Sargioti, Finance Business Partner Growth &
Regeneration, 30 September 2025

2. Legal Advice: The Bus Gate proposals for Park Street will involve some local residents and
business’s having to access their destinations via the CAZ, with any non-compliant vehicles
incurring the CAZ charge where previously they could access their destinations without
entering the CAZ and incurring any charges.

Procedural fairness means that people directly affected by any administrative acts, decisions
or proceedings be given adequate notice of what is proposed so that they are able to make
representations on their behalf prior to any decision being taken.

Those directly affected by the preferred option have been given prior notice of what is being
proposed, together with details of any support that will be available through the transitional
period of one year after the Bus Gate is operational, with sufficient time and detail to enable
them to consider the preferred option and be able to make representations to committee if
they would like to do so.

The preferred option is an appropriate and proportionate approach allowing those affected
sufficient time and opportunity to acquire a CAZ compliant vehicle or to switch to alternative
modes of transport.

Legal Team Manager: Joanne Mansfield 28 August 2025

3. Implications on IT: I can see no implications on IT arising from this report.

IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead Enterprise Architect – 10 September 2025

4. HR Advice: The Bus Gate proposals for Park Street will increase administrative tasks for the
team and if this additional work is unable to be absorbed within the current structure,
recruitment processes will be undertaken in line with our policies and procedures.

HR Partner: Niki Rodgers, HR Manager – 12 September 2025

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal YES

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) YES

Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment NO

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO
Template approved March 25
Page 75
OFFICIAL
Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

Template approved March 25
Page 76
OFFICIAL
Clean Air Zone Boundary (area in blue is the Clean Air Zone):

General Arrangement drawing of the proposed Bus Lane and Bus Gate on Queens
Road and Park Street:

Page 77
OFFICIAL
Page 78
Project Preferred Option: Retain Bus Gate at the northern end of Park Street and offer exemptions/financial support for those with non-compliant vehicles

Use Case Could BCC offer exemption? Financial support details Exemption Solution Eligibility Further details on solution Risks Alternatives
FAS still operates and we can offer mobility credits to
Repurpose RPS Permit systems to enable residents to apply for an Eligibility would be based on proven residency at
Residents Y individual or and businesses. Already available to anyone
exemption a qualifying property within the specified area
who qualifies.
Would grant a specified no. of day exemptions. 1. Residents may not activate the exemption correctly which
Visitors to residential properties
Repurpose RPS Permit systems to offer exemptions as we do for RPS Eligibility would be based on proven residency at Each pass would be valid for 1VRM for one could create conflict between the registered keeper of the
(including delivery drivers and Y FAS still operates. Mobility credits open to all.
visitor permits a qualifying property within the specified area calendar day and would have to be activated by vehicle and the resident. Risks may be greater for delivery
tradespeople)
resident drivers/tradespeople who are not known to the resident
Business vehicles (not
We can offer mobility credits to individual or and Repurpose RPS Permit systems to enable businesses to apply for an Eligibility would be based on proven occupation
staff/commuters). Operational vehicles Y
businesses. Already available to anyone who qualifies. exemption for the business' commercial vehicles of qualifying property within the specified area
insured for business use.

FAS still operates and we can offer mobility credits to
Residents could manage these using visitor exemptions or an
Informal carers Y individual or and businesses. Already available to anyone 1. Risk of conflict if errors are made and PCNs are issued
Essential Visitor Exemption (as we have in RPS)
who qualifies.

FAS still operates and we can offer mobility credits to 1. Residents could manage these using visitor exemptions
Professional carers Y individual or and businesses. Already available to anyone 2. Alternatively, could repurpose RPS Permit System to offer 1. Risk of conflict if errors are made and PCNs are issued
who qualifies. exemptions as we do for RPS Medical Permits and EBLN

Business owners/employees Can apply for mobility credits as part of CAZ scheme. FAS There is alternative pay and display parking outside
N Not Applicable the CAZ and at West End Car Park. These are viable
(commuters) scheme etc
alternatives.

Customers/delivery Can apply for mobility credits as part of CAZ scheme. FAS There is alternative pay and display parking outside
N Not Applicable the CAZ and at West End Car Park. These are viable
drivers/tradespeople visiting the area scheme etc
alternatives.

Can apply for mobility credits as part of CAZ scheme. FAS There is alternative pay and display parking outside
Visitors to St Georges Hall N Not Applicable the CAZ and at West End Car Park. These are viable
scheme etc
alternatives.

Can apply for mobility credits as part of CAZ scheme. FAS There is alternative pay and display parking outside
The Georgian House Museum N Not Applicable the CAZ and at West End Car Park. These are viable

Page 79
scheme etc
alternatives.

Can apply for mobility credits as part of CAZ scheme. FAS There is alternative pay and display parking outside
Brandon Hill Park N Not Applicable the CAZ and at West End Car Park. These are viable
scheme etc
alternatives.

Can apply for mobility credits as part of CAZ scheme. FAS There is alternative pay and display parking outside
Blue Badge Holders N Not Applicable the CAZ and at West End Car Park. These are viable
scheme etc
alternatives.
Equality Impact Assessment [version 2.9]
Title: Clean Air Zone EqIA 2022
(post FBC update of “Improving Public Health: Bristol Clean Air Zone (CAZ) – Full business cases” EqIA)
☐ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☒ New
☒ Other [please state]: Directive from Government ☐ Already exists / review ☐ Changing
Directorate: Growth & Regeneration Lead Officer name: Stephen Peacock
Service Area: Transport Lead Officer role: SRO

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of an Equality Impact Assessment is to assist decision makers in understanding the impact of proposals
as part of their duties under the Equality Act 2010. Detailed guidance to support completion can be found here
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com).
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the process by someone with a good knowledge of the
proposal and service area, and sufficient influence over the proposal. It is good practice to take a team approach to
completing the equality impact assessment. Please contact the Equality and Inclusion Team early for advice and
feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Describe who it is aimed at and the intended aims /
outcomes. Where known also summarise the key actions you plan to undertake. Please use plain English, avoiding
jargon and acronyms. Equality Impact Assessments are viewed by a wide range of people including decision-makers
and the wider public.
Bristol City Council is wholly committed to enabling clean air in the city and to achieving this as quickly as possible,
whilst making sure that we put in place measures that will mitigate the impact on people with protected
characteristics (and/or from low income households).

Due to the scale of the issue in urban areas nationally, Her Majesty’s Government in 2017 formally directed 24
local authorities (including Bristol City Council) to submit plans for how they will achieve compliance to the legal
NO2 limits and how they would implement these plans by the end of March 2021.

Local authorities were therefore required to model various options for achieving clean air and to take forward the
option that delivers compliance against the NO2 legal limits within the shortest possible time, reduces exposure
the quickest and ensures that compliance is not just possible but likely.

From 1st July 2019 Bristol City Council carried out a six-week public consultation on two options for achieving NO2
compliance: option 1: a Medium CAZ C charging scheme with additional non -charging measures and mitigations;
option 2, a Small Area Diesel Car Ban with mitigations.

Following consultation and further technical analysis on both options, officers recommended that we progress
with a ‘Hybrid’ option, which merged options 1 and 2 described above. This was the option that achieved
compliance in line with our legal obligations.

Since the Council submitted the OBC in November 2019, further modelling and evaluation work has continued as
part of refinement work and there have been regular discussions between Bristol City Council and JAQU. The
main discussions being:

1. Technical questions relating to the Diesel Ban, in particular the area of the ban and assumptions around
behaviour change.
Page 80
2. Additional technical work that has been carried out that now shows a compliance date for the Hybrid
scheme of 2023.
3. Matters relating to the ability to deliver Diesel Ban as Government had not provided the appropriate
powers to Bristol City Council to implement a ban by passing the necessary secondary legislation and,
4. The Joint Air Quality Unit (JAQU) requiring further modelling work to ensure that other viable options are
being considered by the Council, should they be required. This included modelling a medium CAZ C with a
small CAZ D. Further analysis and sensitivity testing had been continuing on this option to ensure that the
option that is put forward in the Full Business Case fully complied with the Government Direction of
achieving compliance with the legal NO2 limits in the shortest possible time.

The further modelling work enabled good progress to be made on refining the data and had enabled us to move
forward positively. The most important aspect to note is that as a result of this additional refinement work, the
compliance year moved from 2025 to 2023. This will bring improved health to Bristol in a much shorter timescale
than originally expected.

On the 13th March 2020 a formal Direction was received from the Rt. Hon Rebecca Pow who wrote to Mayor Rees
stating the following:

To ensure delivery of NO2 compliance in the shortest possible time, I attach to this letter a Ministerial Direction
requiring Bristol City Council to:

• Implement a charging Clean Air Zone Class C with additional measures as soon as possible and at least in
time to bring forward compliance to 2023. I expect this to begin to be in place by 1 April 2020 at the
latest; and
• Submit to JAQU a Full Business Case by 18 September 2020 at the latest.

‘In the event that your preferred option of a medium CAZ C with additional measures, which could be either a
diesel ban or small area CAZ D, is either not deliverable or is shown through further modelling to not deliver
compliance in the shortest possible time, I expect you to pursue an alternative option for compliance, including a
medium size class D CAZ.’

COVID-19 impact

It is important to note that having received the Government Direction and letter from the Rt. Hon Rebecca Pow
MP on the 13th March 2020, the situation regarding COVID-19 escalated and further Government advice was
subsequently provided.

In continuing discussions with JAQU throughout this period, Bristol City Council continued to assess the situation
and monitor the impacts of COVID-19. During this time JAQU issued a statement from the Joint Heads of
Department stating that no Clean Air Zones will be implemented before January 2021 in recognition of the
challenges and unknown entities that the situation presented.

Despite the challenges that lockdown (which commenced on the 23 March 2020) presented, council officers made
significant progress in continuing with the additional required modelling and technical assessments as set out in
the letter from Minister Pow on the 13th March 2020. These were all submitted in line with the requirements
placed upon us.

Following the submission of the required information and subsequent discussions with JAQU officers, the Council
was issued with a new Direction on 20 August 2020 which required the Council to:

Implement the local plan for nitrogen dioxide (NO2) compliance, specifying a Medium Charging Clean Air Zone
Class C with small Charging Clean Air Zone Class D and additional measures, subject to provision of further
evidence to be submitted.

4—(1) The authority must take steps to implement the local plan for NO2 compliance for the areas for which it is
responsible.
(2) The authority must ensure that the local plan Page
for NO2 compliance
81 is implemented so that—
(a) compliance with the legal limit value for nitrogen dioxide is achieved in the shortest possible time, and by
2023 at the latest.
(b) exposure to levels above the legal limit for nitrogen dioxide are reduced as quickly as possible.

Duty to submit additional documentation

5.—(1) The authority must submit to the Secretary of State further options appraisal (including transport and air
quality modelling) by 4 December 2020 at the latest, in order to provide assurance that the local plan for
NO2 compliance will deliver compliance in the shortest possible time and by 2023 at the latest.

(2) The revised air quality modelling provided under paragraph (1) must demonstrate the green recovery
measures and the applicable class of charging Clean Air Zone, in the medium and small zone, appropriate
behavioural assumptions, and what (if any) additional measures, or adjustments to the local plan for NO2
compliance would need to be implemented by the authority to deliver compliance in the shortest possible
time.

Duty to prepare and submit a full business case

6.—(1) The authority must as part of its feasibility study continue with the work necessary to prepare a full
business case for the area for which it is responsible.
(2) The full business case must be submitted to the Secretary of State as soon as possible and by 26 February
2021 at the latest.

Submission of the full business case to the Secretary of State

8. When submitting its full business case, the authority must provide the Secretary of State with the following
information—
(a) the date on which it is proposed that the scheme identified in the full business case will start to be
implemented, which must be by 29 October 2021 at the latest.

There is a requirement to have undergone the necessary procurement activities, to have installed infrastructure
and be ready to go live with the CAZ from this date. In order to achieve this, the FBC must be submitted well in
advance to allow for the continued dialogue with JAQU to take place, agreeing the way forward at every gateway
review. The Direction is as a direct result of intense engagement with JAQU which is continuing in order to satisfy
both parties that the Bristol Clean Air Zone is the right strategic fit for Bristol that will meet the legal
requirements.

Post COVID-19 emerging situation

The Outline Business Case (OBC) that was submitted to JAQU in November 2019 included a set of proposals that
offered the most appropriate measures for Bristol at that time and that were aligned with the Mayor’s strategic
vision for the future development and direction of the city. However, the situation changed dramatically, without
warning, due to the global pandemic caused by COVID-19.

The council has reviewed the impact of the pandemic and the inevitable change to the project baseline that this
presents, the baseline which included previously modelled results and data analysis having been set in 2018 has
now dramatically changed. The methodologies, modelling and assumptions that have been used up until the
outbreak of COVID-19 are now outdated and do not take into account the effects of COVID-19 on our city. As
such, consideration was given to how we move forward in a way that delivers clean air and improved health
benefits to Bristol, recognising the unprecedented times we are in while also seeking to protect and enhance our
economy.

In July 2020 the Government announced funding of £2bn to create ‘a new era’ for cycling and walking. It has been
a long -held ambition for Bristol to create more liveable neighbourhoods that are free from traffic congestion and
pollution, giving more space to residents and businesses and improving walking and cycling journeys. This
ambition has become more important than ever in the context of COVID-19.
Page 82
Officers have been in continual dialogue with JAQU to consider the most suitable manner in which Bristol can
respond to the pandemic and take into account the new environment. Our bold plans to reallocate through traffic
away from the city centre in response to COVID-19 is testament to the level of ambition we hold in transforming
how people get around the city. In a short space of time and with the help of enabling legislation from
Government, we have made some radical changes to some of the most polluting areas in Bristol.

We closed Baldwin Street to help insulate and promote local bus services and ensure that residents are
encouraged to adopt public transport and active modes of travel. Other measures include the closure of Bristol
Bridge to through traffic other than buses, motorbikes, taxis and cyclists, new segregated cycle routes on Park
Row, Upper Maudlin St and Lewin’s Mead. Access to the central hospital and Bristol University has also been
improved with new segregated cycle routes.

The new proposals seek to build on these measures and develop further schemes to ensure we are successful in
improving air quality on our most polluted corridors, making schemes permanent or extended as required.

There is evidence that air quality improved during the first lockdown as movement around the city reduced and
travel behaviour changed. The Council’s preferred approach is to build on these behaviour changes and to
encourage citizens and businesses to sustain the recent, less polluting travel behaviour that had been seen during
the pandemic, without needing to implement a charging CAZ. The Council has supported this with improvements
to roads around the city that make it easier to walk, cycle or use public transport. On September 1st 2020, the
Mayor issued a call to action during a Council Cabinet Meeting, stressing that in order for there to be a reasonable
chance of avoiding a charging zone, people would need to modify their travel behaviour. He said:

“We need to use this opportunity for people to transition onto public transport. We can have
conversations with our bus providers to facilitate that and make sure people can do it in a safe way. But,
that transition also helps us build the longer-term case for the mass transit system that we’re also bringing
through. This really is a call to action. This is not something that the council can deliver alone; this is about
us as a city collectively engaging in behaviour change in the way we move around. If we collectively
engage in that behaviour change, we can get ourselves to compliance in the shortest possible time in a
way that does not further compound the economic woes faced by households and businesses in Bristol.”

Whilst we cannot say from the data being gathered that traffic levels and associated pollution levels will definitely
return to pre COVID levels, we also don’t have sufficient evidence to say otherwise. This data has now been
submitted and will be reviewed by the science team at JAQU as part of a full technical review of all the data
submitted. JAQU will subsequently conclude what measures Bristol are required to implement and, on that basis,
in order to comply with legal duties, Bristol would have no option but to propose a charging zone to meet our
legal duties if that is deemed the preferred approach by JAQU.

A further 6-week consultation took place from October 8th 2020. This was extended due to the impact of Covid-
19, to the 13th December 2020. There were 2 options consulted on: a dual zone consisting of a Medium CAZ C
(charging all commercial non-compliant vehicles) with a small CAZ D (charging all non-compliant vehicles including
private cars) and a standalone option of a small CAZ D (results explained on page 8 of this report). This data
alongside a revised Distributional Equalities Impact Assessment was used to prepare this EqIA.

1.2 Who will the proposal have the potential to affect?
☒ Bristol City Council workforce ☒ Service users ☒ The wider community
☒ Commissioned services ☒ City partners / Stakeholder organisations
Additional comments:

1.3 Will the proposal have an equality impact?
Could the proposal affect access levels of representation or participation in a service, or does it have the potential to
change e.g. quality of life: health, education, or standard of living etc.?
If ‘No’ explain why you are sure there will be no equality impact, then skip steps 2-4 and request review by Equality
and Inclusion Team. Page 83
If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment, or if you plan to complete the assessment at a later stage please state
this clearly here and request review by the Equality and Inclusion Team.

☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

Step 2: What information do we have?

2.1 What data or evidence is there which tells us who is, or could be affected?
Please use this section to demonstrate an understanding of who could be affected by the proposal. Include general
population data where appropriate, and information about people who will be affected with particular reference to
protected and other relevant characteristics: https://www.bristol.gov.uk/people-communities/measuring-equalities-
success .
Use one row for each evidence source and say which characteristic(s) it relates to. You can include a mix of
qualitative and quantitative data e.g. from national or local research, available data or previous consultations and
engagement activities.
Outline whether there is any over or under representation of equality groups within relevant services - don't forget
to benchmark to the local population where appropriate. Links to available data and reports are here Data, statistics
and intelligence (sharepoint.com). See also: Bristol Open Data (Quality of Life, Census etc.); Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA); Ward Statistical Profiles.

For workforce / management of change proposals you will need to look at the diversity of the affected teams using
available evidence such as HR Analytics: Power BI Reports (sharepoint.com) which shows the diversity profile of
council teams and service areas. Identify any over or under-representation compared with Bristol economically
active citizens for different characteristics. Additional sources of useful workforce evidence include the Employee
Staff Survey Report and Stress Risk Assessment Form

Data / Evidence Source Summary of what this tells us
[Include a reference where known]
The most recent analysis Significant parts of the city are affected by air pollution in excess of the
commissioned by Bristol City UK and EU standards for nitrogen dioxide – this is called the Air Quality
Council – based on evidence from Management Area (AQMA). This covers the city centre, central
the Committee on the Medical residential areas and main roads. Approximately 100,000 people live in
Effects of Air Pollutants (COMEAP) the city centre and many more study, work and travel through this area.
calculated that around 300 deaths
each year in the City of Bristol could
be attributed to exposure to both
nitrogen dioxide and fine particulate
matter.
161012 CAZ Impact Assessment FINAL In 2016, a government assessment of the impact of Clean Air Zones was
consultation.pdf (defra.gov.uk) undertaken in five of the cities that were directed to implement CAZs.

The Distribution and Equality Impact Analysis indicates that communities
with a high disability ratio are located throughout the Clean Air Zone, and
may suffer from reduced accessibility with the implementation of the
proposed Clean Air Zone scheme, due to more limited choices on modes
of compliant transport.

Relevant exemptions for this group include:
• People with disabled passenger tax class on their vehicles are
permanently exempt nationally.
• A range of targeted exemptions (up to 15 March 2023) for those
Page
supporting vital 84and disadvantaged groups i.e. community
services
transport, blue badge holders, community-based education, health or
social care service providers, those supporting the emergency services
and wheelchair accessible taxis.
• A targeted exemption through to the expected vehicle handover
date or up to two years from the launch date at the latest for those
accepted for the financial assistance scheme but who need to wait for a
vehicle to be manufactured and delivered;
• A general ‘means-tested’ exemption for everyone (except those
with pre-Euro 4 vehicles manufactured before approx. 2005/6) that is
also accessed via the financial assistance scheme i.e. if a vehicle owner or
operator passes the eligibility checks but fails the affordability checks
they are able to apply for a temporary exemption for up to two years
from the launch date;
• The team are continually improving accessibility to our
exemption processes; for example, holders of a blue badge exemption
are required to log each journey into the Clean Air Zone. This requires a
text service using a short code telephone number, which may be difficult
to access for customers, depending upon the mobile phone provider or
their knowledge and use of technology. Each application for an
exemption is reviewed and reasonable adjustments to support the
customer are made, where necessary.

People from low-income groups that are required to pay a charge may be
negatively affected, and this may have a detrimental impact on life
chances and also health improvements. This is further explored for Bristol
residents in section three of this report.

Quality of Life Survey 2021/22 In relation to the proportion of people who say air pollution prevents
them leaving their house when they want to, the council’s Quality of Life
Survey 2021 / 22 shows there are clear differences between both equality
groups and where people live.

People’s perception of air quality in their neighbourhood is unlikely to be
closely related to NO2 air quality measurements as it will likely be
governed by a range of factors including proximity to busy roads,
frequency of neighbourhood bonfires and solid fuel burning and
proximity to industrial processes.

There are also significant disparities in the extent to which Bristol citizens
find inaccessible public transport prevents them from leaving their home
when they want to .

% for whom air pollution prevents
them from leaving their home
Characteristic when they want to
Bristol Average 8.3
Most Deprived 10% 5.7
16 to 24 years 4.9
50 years and older 6.8
65 years and older 7.4
Female 8.7
Male 7.7
Disabled 10.2
Black, Asian and minority ethnic 8.7
Page 85
Asian/Asian British 6.8
Black/Black British 8.7
Mixed/Multiple ethnic groups 12.2
White 8.1
White Minority Ethnic 9.2
White British 8.0
Christian 6.4
Other religion 9.6
No religion or faith 8.7
Single parent 6.1
Two parent 8.4
No qualifications 8.1
Owner Occupier 8.3
Rented from housing association 6.8
Rented from the council 5
Rented from private landlord 9.4
Non degree qualifications 5.7
Degree qualifications 9.4
Part-time carer 8.2
Full-time carer 8.3
Carer (All) 8.2
Parents (All) 8.1
Lesbian, Gay or Bisexual 9.5

% for whom air
pollution prevents
them from leaving
their home when
Bristol Ward they want to
Ashley 16.8
Avonmouth and Lawrence Weston 11.8
Bedminster 2.4
Bishopston and Ashley Down 4.4
Bishopsworth 3.1
Brislington East 7.9
Brislington West 13.3
Central 10.1
Clifton 6.1
Clifton Down 5.7
Cotham 4.2
Easton 15.9
Eastville 12.9
Filwood 16.2
Frome Vale 8.3
Hartcliffe and Withywood 4.2
Henbury and Brentry 8.4
Page 86
Hengrove and Whitchurch Park 10.6
Hillfields 7.4
Horfield 6.3
Hotwells and Harbourside 4.9
Knowle 6.2
Lawrence Hill 5.3
Lockleaze 8.8
Redland 7.2
Southmead 5.8
Southville 14.0
St George Central 4.7
St George Troopers Hill 12.1
St George West 12.6
Stockwood 0.7
Stoke Bishop 3.4
Westbury-on-Trym and Henleaze 3.3
Windmill Hill 12.2

% for whom inaccessible public
transport prevents them from
leaving their home when they
Characteristic want to
Bristol Average 11.8
Most Deprived 10% 14.2
16 to 24 years 25.9
50 years and older 10.6
65 years and older 13.9
Female 13.9
Male 9.6
Disabled 24.7
Black, Asian and minority ethnic 13.9
Asian/Asian British 6.8
Black/Black British 13.8
Mixed/Multiple ethnic groups 19.8
White 11.5
White Minority Ethnic 12.1
White British 11.4
Christian 11.5
Other religion 9.2
No religion or faith 12.0
Single parent 15.7
Two parent 6.2
No qualifications 13.4
Owner Occupier 9.9
Rented from housing association 16.8
Page 87
Rented from the council 12
Rented from private landlord 16.7
Non degree qualifications 10.6
Degree qualifications 12.1
Part-time carer 9.9
Full-time carer 23.8
Carer (All) 13.2
Parents (All) 7.4
Lesbian, Gay or Bisexual 19.6

Indices of Multiple Deprivation Deprivation data reveals that whilst the small CAZ are amongst the least
deprived nationally, in terms of employment deprivation, there are a few
pockets of income deprivation of varying degrees on the east side of the
zone.

Vehicle registration data reveals that there are more than 350 non-
compliant cars and LGVs registered in low-income areas within the small
CAZ boundary.

As well as potentially thousands of non-compliant vehicles registered to
low-income households elsewhere in Bristol and the West of England but
travelling into the CAZ. That said, imposition of a CAZ does not preclude
travel into the CAZ; instead households have options for altering their
travel patterns/behaviours and taking advantage of financial support
where eligible.
Additional comments:

The fact that we now need to take account of the radical changes that have occurred as a result of the pandemic
inevitably means that the baseline data has changed as a result of changed working patterns, altered and travel
behaviours; these changes must now be factored into the evidence base for future decision making. In order to
do this, we agreed a new three-staged modelling approach with JAQU to update the baseline and provide the
most current evidence to make decisions.

A methodology has been adopted that carries out modelling and sensitivity testing (reports that test the
modelling results against different scenarios) as well as capturing real time information from existing air quality
monitoring units and the automatic number plate recognition (ANPR) data. As an essential element of the
proposals, additional new air quality monitoring units will be installed to capture as much accurate and real time
data as possible.

This new methodology is largely due to an emerging change in air quality readings. During the periods of
lockdown and post lockdown, air quality and traffic levels were continuously monitored at our five continuous
sites and 100 diffusion tubes sites. While the improvement in air quality during this time was a welcome effect of
the lockdown, in order to define an area as being compliant (within the legal limits set), the air quality is
measured using an annual measurement: annual mean. Therefore, it is not possible to officially state that Bristol
had become air quality compliant at that time.

We manage air pollution levels in order to protect public health. Reducing air pollution leads to a reduction in
both morbidity and mortality.

Air pollution affects the whole of the city and health impacts from poor air quality will be experienced outside
the AQMA.

Page 88
The figure below shows the fraction of deaths (%) considered to be attributable to nitrogen dioxide in Bristol
wards in 2013.

Impacts of Charging Zones if implemented

London introduced an Ultra-Low Emissions Zone (ULEZ) in April 2019 which charges most vehicle types including
cars, taxis, buses, motorcycles and vans - the same area that London’s pre-existing congestion charging zone
covered.

Bath & North Somerset introduced a CAZ C in March 2021 which charges most vehicle types, including taxis,
private hire vehicles, vans (including pick-ups and some camper vans), light goods vehicles, buses, coaches and
heavy goods vehicles that do not meet the required emission standards. Cars and motorcycles are not required
to pay.

Birmingham introduced a CAZ D in June 2021 which, like Bristol, is one of the most extensive Clean Air Zones and
charges cars, buses, coaches, taxis, private hire vehicles (this includes Uber), heavy goods vehicles (lorries), vans
and minibuses that do not meet the required emission standards. Motorcycles are not charged.

At launch the percentage of vehicles not subject to the daily fee in Birmingham was slightly better than the
modelling suggested – at around 85%.

• Low income workers to apply for a temporary exemption of 1 year and residents in the zone 2 years.
• People with disabled passenger tax class on their vehicles are permanently exempt nationally.
Birmingham did not offer exemptions to Blue Badge holders, however, they do offer exemptions to
wheelchair accessible taxis.
• Birmingham also provided support for Taxi and Hackney Carriage drivers who do not speak English in the
form of PowerPoint presentation explaining CAZ in a number of different languages.

Page 89
2.2 Do you currently monitor relevant activity by the following protected characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☒ Gender Reassignment
☒ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☒ Pregnancy/Maternity ☒ Race
☒ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☒ Sexual Orientation

2.3 Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
Where there are gaps in the evidence, or you don’t have enough information about some equality groups, include an
equality action to find out in section 4.2 below. This doesn’t mean that you can’t complete the assessment without
the information, but you need to follow up the action and if necessary, review the assessment later. If you are
unable to fill in the gaps, then state this clearly with a justification.
For workforce related proposals all relevant characteristics may not be included in HR diversity reporting (e.g.
pregnancy/maternity). For smaller teams diversity data may be redacted. A high proportion of not known/not
disclosed may require an action to address under-reporting.
The second consultation received responses from a wide range of groups and residents. Overall, the survey
received 4,225 responses, of which 3,760 (89%) were self-completed online and 465 (11%) were self-completed
using paper surveys.

3,431 responses (81%) were received from postcodes within the Bristol City Council area, 214 (5%) responses
were from South Gloucestershire, 105 (2%) were from North Somerset, and 37 (1%) were from Bath & North-East
Somerset (B&NES). 49 (1%) responses were from further afield, 23 (less than 1%) respondents provided
unidentifiable postcodes, and 366 (9%) did not provide a postcode.

Deprivation - The home location of respondents in Bristol was compared with nationally published information on
levels of deprivation across the city to review if the responses received include a cross-section of people living in
more deprived and less deprived areas. The comparison looked at levels of deprivation in 10 bands (known as
‘deciles’) from decile 1 (most deprived) to decile 10 (least deprived). The response rate from the most deprived
parts of Bristol (deciles 1, 2, 3 and 4) is less than the proportion of citizens living in those areas. The proportion of
respondents in deprivation decile 5 closely matches the proportion of Bristol citizens living in deprivation decile 5.
Response rates from the least deprived parts of the city (deciles 7 to 10) are higher than the proportion of Bristol
citizens living in those areas. Although, the more deprived areas were under-represented as a proportion of the
population, the large number of responses in all deciles enables meaningful comparison of the views of people
living in the most deprived and least deprived areas.

• Age - The most common age of respondents was 35-44 years (23%), followed by 25-34 (20%) and 45-
54 (19%). The proportion of responses in the age categories 35-44, 45-54, 55-64 and 65-74 were higher
than these age groups’ proportion of the population in Bristol. Survey responses from children (under 18),
young people aged 18-24 and people aged 85 and older were underrepresented. In each age category, the
proportions of all respondents and Bristol respondents were very similar.

• Sex - 41% of all responses were from women and 58% were from men. 0.4% were from people who
preferred to self-describe (0.6% for Bristol respondents).

• Disability - The proportion of disabled respondents (8%) matched the proportion of disabled people living
in Bristol (. The proportion of disabled respondents living in Bristol was slightly lower (7%).

• Ethnicity –
− proportions of White British respondents (85%) and White British respondents from Bristol (84%) are
higher than the proportion of White Bristol people in the Bristol population.
− response rates from White Irish (2%) and Other White respondents (8%) were also higher than the
proportion of these groups living in Bristol.
− responses rate from Gypsy / Roma / Traveller people (0.1%) closely matches proportion of citizens in
the Bristol population.
− response rates from Black/Black British, Asian/Asian British, and Mixed Ethnicity citizens was lower
than expected based on Bristol populationPage data by90
ethnicity. We were unable to use some
engagement approaches that have been successful in previous consultations to target
underrepresented communities due to COVID-19 restrictions.

• Religion/faith - People with no religion (67% of respondents and 70% of Bristol respondents) responded in
higher proportions that people of no religion in Bristol’s population. Christians (27%), Muslims (0.8%),
Hindus (0.4%) and Sikhs (0.2%) were under-represented compared to the proportions of these faiths living
in Bristol. The proportion of Jewish respondents (0.4%) was higher than the Bristol population, as were
Buddhists (1%) and people of other faith (2%).

2.4 How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
You will nearly always need to involve and consult with internal and external stakeholders during your assessment.
The extent of the engagement will depend on the nature of the proposal or change. This should usually include
individuals and groups representing different relevant protected characteristics. Please include details of any
completed engagement and consultation and how representative this had been of Bristol’s diverse communities. See
https://www.bristol.gov.uk/people-communities/equalities-groups.
Include the main findings of any engagement and consultation in Section 2.1 above.

If you are managing a workforce change process or restructure please refer to Managing change or restructure
(sharepoint.com) for advice on consulting with employees etc. Relevant stakeholders for engagement about
workforce changes may include e.g. staff-led groups and trades unions as well as affected staff.
A full second consultation programme was designed and planned to ensure that people in the West of England
region understood the issues surrounding air quality as well as the potential solutions.

Due to COVID-19 and the restrictions at the time, all the engagement work was carried out remotely via email,
telephone and video conferencing. Under normal circumstances the engagement process would have been
managed in a different way. It would normally entail face to face meetings and door knocking shifts where the
team would visit each business, speak to the relevant person, give them physical copies of the information and
guide them through the consultation on an iPad; as with the first consultation.

The Transport Engagement and Active Travel team led on the business engagement element of the Clear Air Zone
(CAZ) second consultation, due to the expertise within the team. The Business Engagement Officers work with
businesses to encourage investment in sustainable travel modes both for their fleets and for their employees by
providing expert advice, free support and signposting them to the key offers. The advice and support range from
match funded grants, electric bike loans, and workplace travel audits, to staff engagement events, personalised
travel planning and bike maintenance sessions.

The Travel Advisors within the team led on the phone calls and emails as instructed by the Business Engagement
Officers. The team sent initial emails explaining the CAZ consultation and detailing the current sustainable travel
support. Officers sent 1,005 businesses one or more emails with information about the Traffic Clean Air Zone, a
call to action to complete the consultation and information about the Access West support. The Travel Advisors
then telephoned all business where a response had not been obtained. This enabled officers to reach more
businesses as the initial data gathering exercise often returned general email addresses. By telephoning the team
could often get to speak to the correct person or obtain an email address for them.

As part of this work the Business Engagement Officers also held a range of virtual meetings with the larger
employers in the city to delve a little deeper into the details of CAZ and what that will mean for their
organisations. The officers answered questions, talked through any concerns and have agreed to continue these
meetings to provide ongoing support whilst the details of the CAZ are developed.

Overall, the team put in over 650 hours of officer time supporting businesses during the consultation. The officers
have since supported on the paper copy data input and the coding of the free text analysis which contributed to
another 100 hours of officer time.

Page 91
Briefings were held with several groups including Business West (with 55 businesses joining), University Hospital
Bristol NHS Trust, Southmead Hospital, University of Bristol, University of West of England, Bristol Workplace
Travel Network, waste contractors, and neighbouring councils. We also contacted 1,385 businesses.

Other activities include an online campaign, radio adverts and live reads (Ujima and BCFM), adverts in hyperlocal
publications and newsletters, toolkit including suggested social posts, press release and newsletter content to key
stakeholders including councillors.

2.5 How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
Explain how you will continue to engage with stakeholders throughout the course of planning and delivery. Please
describe where more engagement and consultation is required and set out how you intend to undertake it. Include
any targeted work to seek the views of under-represented groups. If you do not intend to undertake it, please set
out your justification. You can ask the Equality and Inclusion Team for help in targeting particular groups.
− To further address the needs of disabled people who will be impacted by the Clean Air Zone and share
information about available support we will continue to work with the Bristol Disability and Equality Forum,
meet regularly with the Disability Equality Commission, and liaise with other disabled people led stakeholders
as appropriate.

− Bristol Disability Equality Forum have raised concerns including that there isn’t enough financial support
available, and that there is a lack of sufficient public transport alternatives, while there is an exemption period
for blue badge holders this only lasts until March 2023, unaffordable entry charges for non-compliant vehicles,
and all forms of the Clean Air Zone information must be fully accessible.

− To mitigate this as far as possible in the circumstances, we have proposed a package of support within the
confinement of the grant funding that includes financial support to blue badge holders on low incomes (less
than £27,000 a year) that regularly enter the zone, regardless of whether they meet the required number of
working hours. Eligibility will be assessed on a case-by-case basis. There is a £2,000 limit per vehicle that is
fixed and determined by Government across all Clean Air Zones, and this cannot be increased. The local Blue
Badge exemption has already been extended from December 2021 to March 2023, no other local authority
offers this exemption, and any further exemption will likely impact our ability to meet the legal mandated
timeframe for meeting air quality compliance. The council recognises the issue with buses, particularly Dial A
Ride transport, we are working with WECA, to support them with their public transport responsibility to meet
the needs of all citizens.

− We have taken advice from Neighbourhoods and Community teams, and Department for Work and Pensions
and are we are holding ‘CAZ clinics’ targeted towards disabled people. These are being held at accessible
locations such as libraries and job centres to promote and reach out to people to ensure they know what
support is available. Job centres have received training by us and are targeting those on job seekers
allowance.

− We have developed online EasyRead materials and also shared with the Department of Work and Pensions.
There is ongoing review of relevant web pages and resources to make sure they are accessible and
understandable. We have agreed to produce a paper exemption form for those who do not have access to the
internet.

− Providing British Sign Language translations of CAZ social media and website videos

Step 3: Who might the proposal impact?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered above and the characteristics protected by the Equality Act 2010.
Also include details of existing issues for particular groups that you are aware of and are seeking to address or
mitigate through this proposal. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying potential impacts etc.
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com)Page 92
3.1 Does the proposal have any potentially adverse impacts on people based on their
protected or other relevant characteristics?
Consider sub-categories (different kinds of disability, ethnic background etc.) and how people with combined
characteristics (e.g. young women) might have particular needs or experience particular kinds of disadvantage.
Where mitigations indicate a follow-on action, include this in the ‘Action Plan’ Section 4.2 below.
GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many groups)
Accessibility impacts are likely to be mixed. Households on low income, particularly those with children and women are more
likely to be impacted by the Clean Air Zone, as they are more likely to be driving a non-compliant vehicle. Women more often
have the childcare and carer responsibilities. Impacts will be disproportionately felt by some ethnic minorities, disabled
residents and less so for older people.
Whilst there will be some mitigations in place for some disabled people, some of these will be temporary and therefore not
all disabled people will benefit from them for the duration of the scheme, such as those with Blue Badges or those who do
not work and therefore are not eligible to apply for financial assistance.
Affordability impacts are likely to be negative across the socio-economic and business groups that directly interact with CAZ
area, especially where there are charges for non-compliant cars or any restrictions on specific movements. Impacts are
disproportionately felt by the second most and least income deprived communities.
Impacts also fall on businesses operating non-compliant LGVs and HGVs who are either based in the CAZ area or based
elsewhere but operate within central Bristol and hence also interact with the CAZ area. Using TUBA vehicle operating cost
benefits as a proxy for affordability indicates that the impacts are generally positive across the city as a whole, and
distributional assessment of this impact is reasonably even, with a slightly greater proportion in middle-income areas than
either the most or least deprived areas.
There will be direct impacts on the costs of operation for LGV/HGV reliant businesses, where their operations interact with
the CAZ area.
Trips by non-compliant LGV/HGV reliant businesses are reasonably spread around the city.
Modelling carried out as part of the Full Business Case suggests that approximately 30% of vehicles driving into the zone do
not currently meet the emissions standard, and therefore will be charged. Bristol City Council issues around 18,000 Blue
Badges each year. A number of these will either have:
- a disabled tax class vehicle which will be covered by a national permanent exemption
- or a Motability vehicle, of which the majority are newer compliant vehicles
- Blue badge holders can apply for a local temporary exemption that will be valid until end of March 2023
Distribution of non-compliant car ownership is bending towards lower income groups. Hence the package of financial support
that is on offer is predominantly targeted at this group as a first priority.
PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • If parents/carers/volunteers/charities cannot afford to pay CAZ charge, and are not
eligible for financial support they may be unable to access sports/leisure activities in the
zone
• Access to schools, driving to multiple schools crossing the boundary
Mitigations: • We will carry out extensive communications with impacted schools in months leading
up to and during launch.
• Performance, poster competition, banners etc. From the poster competition this will
provide case studies for wider comms, making sure younger voices are heard
• Ongoing sustainable travel support as part of schools’ travel workstream
• Home to school transport exemption for vehicles used under a personal travel budget
issued by Council to provide home to school transport
• Exemption for vehicles contracted by councils to provide home to school transport.
• Sustainable transport offers, there is free active travel support to help reduce car
journeys with cycling trials, e-Scooter (over 17 years old only) credit and bus taster
ticket
• Public health videos on social media

Page 93
• Wheels to Work scheme. This offers free travel support to people over the age of 16
who are starting work, work-related training, attending job interviews or recruitment
events.

Age: Older People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • Older people with mobility issues or existing health condition may be impacted
• To be eligible for funding you must work 18 hours or more. Many in this group will be
pensioners not in work, volunteers or retired
• Older people are more likely to have unpaid caring responsibilities – (see ‘Carers’
below) and may need to change their vehicle or be charged; this may also impact ability
for care organisations to recruit care workers within CAZ to provide services for older
adults.
• Older people are more likely to be digitally excluded and less likely to be comfortable
using digital services. Current arrangement are that exemptions can only be applied for
online, or at the Customer Service Point due to the requirement to provide document
evidence.
• Public transport accessibility issues due to 18 bus routes being cut
• Community Dial a Ride service cut from August 2022

Mitigations: • It is calculated higher than 70% of vehicles will be compliant.
• Petrol vehicles from 2006 onwards will be compliant and will not be charged.
• Affordable options to replace a non-compliant vehicles
• Many older people will be exempted by the disabled tax class Blue Badge. Many will be
eligible for Motability support, and the majority of Motability vehicles are compliant
• Financial support, grants, and loans to support those on low income and working
• Sustainable transport offers, there is free active travel support to help reduce car
journeys with cycling trials, eScooter credit and bus taster tickets.
• Exemptions available for Bristol Royal Infirmary hospital patients
• Non digital channels. Bulletins to Bristol Older People Forum (paper printed) and
adverts in community publications e.g. Voice Of publications, Advertising with Reach
plc, The Pigeon, supermarket display boards etc.
• Created EasyRead formats and offering phone calls (to drivers and those who support
them)
• Roadshows and disability clinics across the city to allow people to speak to advisors face
to face
• Supporting bus sector with £2m of retrofit funding to keep fleets clean

Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • Some non-compliant vehicles will have been adapted, and therefore cost more than the
£2,000 funding to change and modify a new vehicle, or retrofit their existing vehicle
• Some disabled people will have greater reliance on their vehicles for independence.
• May require more healthcare visits into the zone
• Complex scheme and difficult to communicate to people with learning difficulties and
additional registration procedures for Disabled people e.g., blue badge exemption,
registration for Disabled Road tax
• Public transport accessibility issues due to 18 bus routes being cut
• Mobility credits may be inaccessible to Disabled people who cannot use Voi scooters
and have had their bus services cut
• Some Disabled people are not a recipient of enhanced benefits and would not be able
to apply for exemptions by registering for Disabled Road tax
• Community Dial a Ride service cut from August 2022
• Currently no option to apply for exemptions by telephone (being explored)
• Blue Badge exemption only available to 31/03/23
• Disabled people may face barriers on paying charges (payment are only online or over
the phone)
• Disabled people earn less than non-Disabled people, therefore will have less financial
income to pay the CAZ charges and/or buy a compliant vehicle

Page 94
Mitigations: • Affordable options to replace non-compliant vehicles e.g. 2005 compliant petrol
vehicles on the market for just over £2,000.
• Those on low income/eligible for grant funding can trade in their own vehicle and be
eligible for £2,000 grant to replace with a complaint vehicle. This funding can go
towards modifications.
• Many disabled people will either have compliant vehicles, a Motability vehicle or be
eligible for disabled tax class national exemption or a local temporary Blue Badge
exemption.
• No one is restricted from entering the zone, but those with non-compliant vehicles will
have to pay the charge if they want to enter the zone
• Bristol is the only city to introduce a local temporary Blue Badge exemption. This is not
tied to an individual so can be used by parents and family, allowing a longer period to
replace the non-compliant vehicle or explore alternative travel options
• CSP will support people with the application process to apply online
• Disability clinics across the city to allow people to speak to advisors face to face
• Making all comms and marketing materials accessible and using targeted engagement
outreach
• Financial support, grants, and loans to support those on low income and working
• For disabled children:
- Home to school transport exemption for vehicles used under a personal travel budget
issued by a council to provide home to school transport
- Exemption for vehicles contracted by councils to provide home to school transport.
Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • Women are more likely to have unpaid caring responsibilities for children and older
adults, and therefore likely to work less than the 18-hours and not meet the threshold
for financial support
• Households with only one car may mean that women are more reliant on public
transport - Public transport accessibility issues due to 18 bus routes being cut
• Women and girls are more likely to experience harassment and less likely to feel safe
using public transport
• Women are more likely to earn less than men and be impacted more by the CAZ
charges and/or buying a compliant vehicle

Mitigations: • Affordable options to replace a non-compliant vehicles - petrol vehicles from 2006
onwards will be compliant and will not be charged.
• Sustainable transport offers, there is free active travel support to help reduce car
journeys with cycling trials, and bus taster tickets
• Financial support, grants, and loans to support those on low income and working once
returned to work following maternity leave
• Outside of the scope of CAZ proposals the Council is involved in multi-agency
partnership work to promote increased safety on public transport e.g. via Bristol Public
Transport Safety and Equalities Group.
Sexual orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: • We do not have evidence to indicate that people are differentially exposed or
vulnerable to air pollution on the basis of their sexual orientation. LGBTQ+ people are
more likely to experience harassment and less likely to feel safe using public transport

Mitigations: Use alternative options trialling using car clubs, bikes or e-scooters. Outside of the scope of CAZ
proposals the Council is involved in multi-agency partnership work to promote increased safety
on public transport e.g. via Bristol Public Transport Safety and Equalities Group.
Pregnancy / Maternity Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • No financial support for people employed on maternity leave, until they return to work.
• If they cannot afford to pay the CAZ it is possible some people may experience
problems in accessing medical appointments, toddler groups or other support networks
for parents, because of impacts on community transport and health care providers and
voluntary groups
• Public transport accessibility issues due to 18 bus routes being cut

Page 95
Mitigations: • Affordable options to replace a non-compliant vehicles - petrol vehicles from 2006
onwards have will be compliant and will not be charged.
• Sustainable transport offers, there is free active travel support to help reduce car
journeys with cycling trials, and bus taster tickets

Gender reassignment Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: We do not have evidence to indicate that people are differentially exposed or vulnerable to air
pollution on the basis of their gender reassignment. See comment in ‘sexual orientation’ above
re LGBTQ+ people and safety using public transport.
Mitigations: Use alternative options trialling using car clubs, bikes or e-scooters
Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • High proportion of Black and minoritised communities live close to the zone and are
more likely to be on lower incomes. See Socio-Economic section
• Language barriers – may not speak much English or at all. CAZ (rules) exemptions and
criteria for funding are complex and may not be understood
• If they cannot afford to pay the CAZ it is possible some people may experience
problems in accessing facilities such as medical centres and other community/support
networks
• Historically minitised ethnic communities have been underprepresented in
consultations and decision making processes. Despite substantial efforts to reach all
communities in our previous CAZ engagement and consultation, Bristol, Asian &
minority ethnic citizens were underrepresented in responses.

Mitigations: • Translation/interpretation services have also been made available to facilitate
applications for exemptions, where English is not the applicant’s first language.
• Financial support, grants, and loans to support those on low income and working
• Making all comms and marketing materials accessible and using targeted engagement
outreach
• Non digital channels. Adverts in community publications e.g. Voice Of publications,
Advertising with Reach plc, The Pigeon, supermarket display boards etc.
• Roadshows across the city to allow people to speak to advisors face to face
• Sustainable transport offers, there is free active travel support to help reduce car
journeys with cycling trials, eScooter credit and bus taster tickets
Religion or Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Belief
Potential impacts: • A number of faith-based venues are located within the boundary of the Clean Air Zone.
Attendees to these venues may be disadvantaged if they do not have alternative,
compliant methods of transport
• If they cannot afford to pay the charge, they may not be able to access these venues
• Citizens and from people from non-Christian faith groups were somewhat
underrepresented in CAZ consultation responses
• People from non-Christian faith groups in Bristol are less likely that average to find
public transport accessible and convenient (QoL survey), and faith based hate-crime
may be a concern for some citizens.
Mitigations: • The majority of vehicles will be compliant. It is calculated higher than 70% of vehicles
will be compliant.
• Affordable options to replace a non-compliant vehicles
• Financial support, grants and loans to help people to replace vehicles that don’t meet
the zone’s emission standards.
• Low income support, individuals working in the CAZ earning less than £26,000, will be
prioritised for financial support.
• Sustainable transport offers, there is free active travel support to help reduce car
journeys with cycling trials, eScooter credit and bus taster tickets.
• As above - the Council in involved in wider multi-agency work to promote safety and
equality on public transport.

Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
civil partnership
Page 96
Potential impacts: We do not have evidence to indicate that people are differentially exposed or vulnerable to air
pollution on the basis of their marriage / civil partnership.
Mitigations:
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS
Socio-Economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: • Affecting the poorest wards at a time of economic distress and a spiralling rising cost of
living
• It is possible that people within this group may find it difficult to access and afford
alternative, compliant methods of transport, particularly if they are low paid and work
antisocial or flexible shifts and can’t access public services.
Mitigations: • The majority of vehicles will be compliant. It is calculated higher than 70% of vehicles
will be compliant.
• Petrol vehicles from 2006 onwards will be compliant and will not be charged.
• Financial support, grants and loans to help people and businesses replace vehicles that
don’t meet the zone’s emission standards.
• Low income support, individuals working in the CAZ earning less than £26,000, will be
prioritised for financial support.
• Home to school transport exemption for vehicles used under a personal travel budget
issued by a council to provide home to school transport, and for vehicles contracted by
councils to provide home to school transport.
• Wheels to Work scheme. This offers free travel support to people over the age of 16
who are starting work, work-related training, attending job interviews or recruitment
events.
• Sustainable transport offers, there is free active travel support to help reduce car
journeys with cycling trials, eScooter credit and bus taster tickets.
Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • Likely to be on lower wages
• Could be part time who may not meet the eligibility criteria for funding
• Could be an unpaid carer i.e. a volunteer, family or friend who would not meet the
eligibility criteria for funding
• More likely to be reliant on their own vehicle for work rather than rely on public
transport
• More likely to have older non-compliant vehicles
• Little control over where they are sent to work (cannot bypass the zone)
• May care for older or Disabled person who is reliant on vehicle transport
• Carer’s will not directly qualify for exemptions by registering for Disabled Road tax on
behalf of Disabled person in their care (however a carer’s vehicle is eligible for
exemption when carrying a blue badge holder)
Mitigations: • Petrol vehicles from 2006 onwards have will be compliant and will not be charged.
• Affordable options to replace a non-compliant vehicles
• The majority of vehicles will be compliant. It is calculated higher than 70% of vehicles
will be compliant.
• Financial support, grants and loans to help people and businesses replace vehicles that
don’t meet the zone’s emission standards: Low income support, individuals working in
the CAZ earning less than £26,000, will be prioritised for financial support of £2,000 for
cars and up to £4,500 for Light Goods Vehicles.

Other groups [Please add additional rows below to detail the impact for other relevant groups as appropriate e.g. Asylums
and Refugees; Looked after Children / Care Leavers; Homelessness]
Potential impacts: We do not have evidence to indicate that people are differentially exposed or vulnerable to air
pollution other than those groups above.
Mitigations:

3.2 Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their protected or other
relevant characteristics?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our Public Sector Equality Duty to: Page 97
✓ Eliminate unlawful discrimination for a protected group
✓ Advance equality of opportunity between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t
✓ Foster good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t

All protected characteristics
Nitrogen dioxide levels brought about by compliance with the Ministerial Direction should have an
overall positive impact on people within all protective characteristic groups. It is recognised as a
contributing factor in the onset of heart disease and cancer. This represents about 8.5% of deaths in the
administrative area of Bristol being attributable to air pollution.

Young people
A reduction in No2 levels will ultimately save lives. Evidence suggests that poor air quality can cause
permanent lung damage in babies and young children and exacerbates lung and heart disease in older
people . A 2017 report into the health effects of air pollution in Bristol concluded that around 300
premature deaths each year in the City of Bristol can be attributed to exposure to nitrogen dioxide
(NO2)is associated with several adverse health impacts.

Older people
A reduction in hospitalisation and overall improvement in longer term conditions. Older people are
disproportionately affected by air pollution with spikes in particulate matter associated with increased
strokes and hospitalisation. Many are already living with cardiovascular diseases, COPD and other
breathing problems. Exposure to air pollution has also been associated with cognitive decline in older
people.

As a result, general improvements will benefit this age group. Their relative geographical distribution is
not strongly aligned to polluted areas or potential charging zones.

Disability
Some disabled people, for example those with breathing difficulties are more vulnerable to air pollution.
There is growing evidence that long-term exposure to outdoor air pollution is thought to increase the
risk of developing COPD loss of lung function and increased respiratory symptoms. Reducing N02 should
see general health benefits for all people suffering with respiratory illnesses.

Pregnancy / Maternity
Emerging evidence suggests that air pollution can affect the growth of the unborn baby and may be
linked to premature birth (Impact of London's road traffic air and noise pollution on birth weight:
retrospective population-based cohort study, British Medical Journal 2017.) (RCPCH and RCP Report
Every Breath We Take). Therefore, the reduction in nitrogen dioxide levels brought about by compliance
with the Ministerial Directions should have a positive impact on people within this protective
characteristic group.

Race
Black and minoritised communities make up a larger proportion of the population living in the more
polluted areas – the Air Quality Management Area - than the city as a whole, and therefore it is
reasonable to assume that they experience greater exposure to air pollution. Successful interventions to
improve air quality should contribute to improving the citywide health of Black, Asian and minority
ethnic people.

Socio-Economic (deprivation)
Page 98
People living in the most deprived areas within the zone should see a positive impact on health due to
the benefits of a reduction in nitrogen dioxide levels brought about by compliance with the Ministerial
Directions.

Sex/religion/gender reassignment
We do not have evidence to indicate that people are differentially exposed or vulnerable to air pollution
on the basis of their: sex; marriage / civil partnership; gender reassignment; or religion and belief.

Step 4: Impact

4.1 How has the equality impact assessment informed or changed the proposal?
What are the main conclusions of this assessment? Use this section to provide an overview of your findings. This
summary can be included in decision pathway reports etc.
If you have identified any significant negative impacts which cannot be mitigated, provide a justification showing
how the proposal is proportionate, necessary, and appropriate despite this.
Summary of significant negative impacts and how they can be mitigated or justified:
Consultation around the CAZ proposal have helped to inform some partial mitigations that have been put in place
wherever possible to support people who may be disproportionately affected on the basis of their protected
characteristics within the restrictions of the grant funding provided by Government. In identifying potential
mitigation targets, exemptions for groups with protected characteristics have been set out. In summary these are:
• National (permanent)
• Disabled passenger vehicles (with tax class 85)
• Disabled vehicles (with tax class 78)
• Local (temporary until March 31 2023)
• Vehicles used by Blue Badge holders
• Vehicles of residents living inside the zone
• Registered community transport vehicles (Section 19 and 21 permits)
• Home to school travel
• Home to school transport (buses, minibuses and coaches
• Vehicles of families with personal travel budgets (PTBs), whose journey to school is through the zone

In identifying potential mitigation targets, it has endorsed the inclusion of mitigation measures, such as a loan and
grant scheme to enable people on low-income with polluting vehicles to enable alternative transport solutions
under the scheme. This may also include some groups with protected characteristics. The financial support
includes: £2,000 towards upgrading to a compliant vehicle if you earn less than £27,000 and work in the zone or
for Blue Badge holders on low incomes (less than £27,000 a year) that regularly enter the zone, regardless of
whether they meet the required number of working hours. Eligibility will be assessed on a case-by-case basis.
Mobility credits up to £100 for bus taster tickets, eScooter credit, bike loans and car club credit
The Government limit for funding for cars is £2k and vans up to £4.5k. This can be used for purchase, adaptations
or retrofit.

Although we have addressed and implemented mitigations wherever practically possible, there are still likely to be
some disproportionate impacts for citizens on the basis of their characteristics and circumstances (detailed in
Section 3 above) for which we are not able fully mitigate, but which we think are justifiable on the basis that the
overall CAZ scheme is reasonable, proportionate and necessary.
Summary of positive impacts / opportunities to promote the Public Sector Equality Duty:
Cleaner Bristol by reducing N02 levels across the city – positive impact on health of children, older people, those
with respiratory diseases, and those living in areas of socio-economic deprivation. Potential reduction in demand
on NHS services in Bristol due to fewer hospitalisations

Page 99
4.2 Action Plan
Use this section to set out any actions you have identified to improve data, mitigate issues, or maximise
opportunities etc. If an action is to meet the needs of a particular protected group please specify this.
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale
Designing paper application form and process for Blue Badge Sarah Clark November 2022
exemptions
Disability clinics to support this group with the impacts of CAZ Megan Buxton Ongoing
Engaging with Bristol Disabled Equalities Forum, to work through James Morvan Ongoing
key issues and offer package of support
Translations of CAZ terms and conditions, and support available, Caitlin Scott October 2022
for Somali and Polish speakers
Providing easy read documents explaining CAZ terms and Caitlin Scott Ongoing
conditions, and support available
Providing British Sign Language translations of CAZ social media Caitlin Scott Ongoing
and website videos

4.3 How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
How will you know if you have been successful? Once the activity has been implemented this equality impact
assessment should be periodically reviewed to make sure your changes have been effective your approach is still
appropriate.
As part of the full business case, an Evaluation & Monitoring Plan was drawn up. This laid out how the project’s
benefits will be monitored through the sensor network in order to show that air pollution levels have reached
legal compliance in the directed timeframe. Through the network of sensors, the council will be able to monitor
air quality improvements by area, and evaluate the degree to which lower income neighbourhoods, and areas
with a higher proportion of residents with protected characteristics, are improving compared to the mean. This
will be carried out by the Air Quality Team.

The monitoring of the exemptions will be determined by the number of people applying for exemptions. The
exemption portal opened 26/09/22 for people to apply in advance of the CAZ launch.

The monitoring of the financial and accessibility impacts upon groups with protected characteristics are difficult to
monitor independently, as the future Quality of Life Survey results on accessibility and transport will be affected
by a range of inter-dependent factors outside the scope of this project. We will be able to assess the support
provided, from the number of people taking up loans and grants, and mobility credits.

Evaluation and Monitoring plan Appendix 38 of the CAZ FBC:
(https://democracy.bristol.gov.uk/documents/b27306/FBC%2027-48%20excluding%20333541%2025th-Feb-
2021%2016.00%20Cabinet.pdf?T=9).

Next review of EqIA scheduled for 6 months after Go Live – May 2023.

Step 5: Review
The Equality and Inclusion Team need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your EqIA. EqIAs
should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers on the equalities
impact of the proposal. Please seek feedback and review from the Equality and Inclusion Team before requesting
sign off from your Director1.
Equality and Inclusion Team Review: Director Sign-Off:

1
Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
Page 100
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

Date: 7/11/2022 Date: 9.11.2022

Page 101
Equality Impact Assessment [version 2.12]

Title: CRSTS A37/A4018 Work Package 3 - Park Street, Triangle and Queens Road
☐ Policy ☐ Strategy ☒ Function ☐ Service ☒ New
☒ Other Project ☐ Already exists / review ☐ Changing
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Thor Sever
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Project Manager

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of an Equality Impact Assessment is to assist decision makers in understanding the impact of proposals
as part of their duties under the Equality Act 2010. Detailed guidance to support completion can be found here
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com).
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the process by someone with a good knowledge of the
proposal and service area, and sufficient influence over the proposal. It is good practice to take a team approach to
completing the equality impact assessment. Please contact the Equality and Inclusion Team early for advice and
feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Describe who it is aimed at and the intended aims /
outcomes. Where known also summarise the key actions you plan to undertake. Please use plain English, avoiding
jargon and acronyms. Equality Impact Assessments are viewed by a wide range of people including decision-makers
and the wider public.

Over the last 10 years we have made changes to the road network to improve bus journey times and
to encourage more walking and cycling. With the climate emergency and 2030 carbon neutral
targets we need to propose radical changes to the road network that will make real differences to
transform bus travel and encourage walking and cycling.

This work package is part of a wider ambitious project to improve how people travel across the city
along key transport routes, making it easier to connect people to jobs and leisure opportunities,
anticipating growing population and supporting the city’s health and economic growth.

The aim is to make it easier and more convenient to use the bus, walk and cycle wherever possible,
rather than use private cars. This project aims to make walking and cycling more attractive and to
give priority to buses through infrastructure improvements. This would reduce air pollution to
improve the health of everyone.

This project therefore looks at the longer-term aspirations to grow bus travel and First West of
England have committed to work with the West of England Combined Authority (WECA) and Bristol City
Council (BCC). This will ensure that the city and bus operators can work together to improve journey
times, increase passenger numbers, and expand the network.

Over the last few years cycling and walking levels have remained high compared to other major
cities and Bristol has seen growth in bus use. COVID-19 has presented extra challenges – bus travel
has by necessity, substantially reduced during the lockdown. At the same time cycling has seen a
significant increase.
Page 102
Without significant investment in walking, cycling and bus infrastructure it will be difficult to
encourage people to drive less and only use cars when essential, particularly as we recover from the
coronavirus pandemic. Investment is needed to tackle high levels of traffic congestion and reduce
levels of air pollution.

Funding is currently available via the City Regional Sustainable Transport Settlement (CRSTS),
administered by West of England Combined Authority (WECA), to make sustainable transport
improvements along certain strategic corridors throughout Bristol.

Our Objectives

This project, as part of the CRSTS funding, seeks to promote public transport and active travel along the
immediate area of Park Street, The Triangle and Queens Road.

The main objectives of this project are to:

• Improve Bus Priority
o This project will seek to implement a new bus gate on the north end of Park Street, with a
banned left turn coming from Canons Road and a bus lane leading into Park Street from
the South.
o This will reduce traffic levels and allow for buses to pass quicker and more efficiently
through the area, encouraging public transport usage
o Smaller provisions throughout the scheme such as altering existing zebra crossings and
implementing signal infrastructure which prioritises buses.
o Improvement to existing bus stops, notably on Queens Road, with a build out and new
formalised bus stop outside of the University.
• Make several public realm improvements along the route,
o Reallocation of road space adjacent to Queens Road, creating a new multi-use ‘Plaza’
space, with added trees, planters and seating.
o This will create point closures on Richmond Hill and Park Plaza
o Formalised permanent closure of University Road, implementing public realm area with
trees, Sheffield stands for cycles, planters, and seating.
o Point closure on Berkely Avenue, with public realm scheme, including planters, seating
areas and potential space for businesses to use the space for tables and chairs.
o Park Street Avenue to be closed to motorised vehicles (outside of specific time zones to
allow for loading for businesses). Public realm scheme to be implemented, including
planters, seating, business table and chairs, and cycle parking.
o Widened footways allowing for low-level planters along Park Street, creating the potential
for business tables and chairs.
o It must be noted that these changes in public realm will not restrict anyone’s ability to
be dropped off at the door of their property or amenities – furthermore there will be
increased disabled parking and loading bays.
• Improve provisions for Active Travel with the implementation of a segregated cycle-way compliant
with LTN 1/20 guidance, with traffic reductions and widened footways along the route improving and
providing safe 8-80 pedestrian and cyclist provision. This includes:
o The introduction of a segregated cycle-way throughout the scheme:
▪ This connects to the Whiteladies Road Flooding Scheme proposed withflow cycle-
way, becoming a two-way segregated cycle-way heading south through the
proposed public-realm scheme ‘Plaza’, with provisions for access to Richmond Hill
and Park Plaza which are now closed to through traffic.

Page 103
This two-way segregated cycle-way continues along the north side of the Triangle,
▪
allowing cyclists a more direct route through the Triangle section, separated from
traffic.
▪ On the eastern side of the Triangle, the cycle-way becomes a segregated withflow
cycleway, with provisions to connect to Park Row developments, and for ease of
access onto Park Street which is now closed to through traffic, reducing traffic and
creating a safer space for cyclists.
▪ Note, parking is now switched to the eastern side of the Park Street from the west,
reducing the risk of ‘car-dooring’ and improving cyclist safety.
o Widened and continuous footways:
▪ Footways are widened throughout the scheme, most notably on and throughout
the length of Park Street, on Queens Road, on Triangle West, and adjacent to the
‘Plaza’ area.
▪ This allows for a safer and more welcoming environment for pedestrians to
navigate.
▪ Continuous footways allow for pedestrians to navigate the footpath and area
more efficiently and safetly, reallocating space away from motorised traffic.

1.2 Who will the proposal have the potential to affect?
☒ Bristol City Council workforce ☒ Service users ☒ The wider community
☐ Commissioned services ☒ City partners / Stakeholder organisations
Additional comments:

1.3 Will the proposal have an equality impact?
Could the proposal affect access levels of representation or participation in a service, or does it have the potential to
change e.g. quality of life: health, education, or standard of living etc.?
If ‘No’ explain why you are sure there will be no equality impact, then skip steps 2-4 and request review by Equality
and Inclusion Team.
If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment, or if you plan to complete the assessment at a later stage please state
this clearly here and request review by the Equality and Inclusion Team.

☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

Step 2: What information do we have?

2.1 What data or evidence is there which tells us who is, or could be affected?
Please use this section to demonstrate an understanding of who could be affected by the proposal. Include general
population data where appropriate, and information about people who will be affected with particular reference to
protected and other relevant characteristics: How we measure equality and diversity (bristol.gov.uk)
Use one row for each evidence source and say which characteristic(s) it relates to. You can include a mix of
qualitative and quantitative data e.g. from national or local research, available data or previous consultations and
engagement activities.
Outline whether there is any over or under representation of equality groups within relevant services - don't forget
to benchmark to the local population where appropriate. Links to available data and reports are here Data, statistics
and intelligence (sharepoint.com). See also: Bristol Open Data (Quality of Life, Census etc.); Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA); Ward Statistical Profiles.
Page 104
For workforce / management of change proposals you will need to look at the diversity of the affected teams using
available evidence such as HR Analytics: Power BI Reports (sharepoint.com) which shows the diversity profile of
council teams and service areas. Identify any over or under-representation compared with Bristol economically
active citizens for different characteristics. Additional sources of useful workforce evidence include the Employee
Staff Survey Report and Stress Risk Assessment

Data / Evidence Source Summary of what this tells us
[Include a reference where known]
Young People and Children - Young people are less likely to own a car
Sources: and are more likely to rely on public
transport and active travel options.
Ward Profile Tool - Microsoft Power BI - Children aged 0 to 16 made the highest
proportion of trips using active transport
Office for National Statistics Population Estimates mid- modes such as walking and cycling in 2021
2022 - Ward Mid-2022 population estimates by broad age with 38%. Those aged 17 to 49 made 32%
band (bristol.gov.uk) to 34% of their trips using active modes.
(National Travel Survey 2021)
Census Data 2021 - Microsoft Power BI - Those aged 17 to 20 made the smallest
proportion of their trips using private
National Travel Survey 2021 modes with 47%, however, this age group
made the highest proportion of their trips
Data: using public transport modes such as bus,
London Underground, rail and taxi or
Central Ward minicab with 21%. (National Travel Survey
o Central Ward has a significantly lower number of 2021)
children under the age of 15 (5.79%) compared with
the Bristol average (17.17%).
o Central Ward has a significantly higher number of
people between the ages of 16-24 (51%) compared
with the Bristol average (16.16%).
o Central Ward has a significantly higher number of full-
time students aged 18 or over (46.9%) compared to
the Bristol average (9.2%).
Hotwells and Harbourside Ward
o Hotwells and Harbourside Ward has a significantly
lower number of children under the age of 15 (5.64%)
compared with the Bristol average (17.17%).
o Hotwells and Harbourside Ward has a significantly
higher number of people between the ages of 16-24
(31.86%) compared with the Bristol average (16.16%).
o Hotwells and Harbourside Ward has a significantly
higher number of full-time students aged 18 or over
(26%) compared to the Bristol average (9.2%).
Clifton Ward
o Clifton Ward has a significantly lower number of
children under the age of 15 (8.26%) compared with
the Bristol average (17.17%).
o Clifton Ward has a significantly higher number of
people between the ages of 16-24 (28.92%) compared
with the Bristol average (16.16%).
o Clifton Ward has a significantly higher number of full-
time students aged 18 or over (23.5%) compared to
the Bristol average (9.2%).
Clifton Down Ward

Page 105
o Clifton Down Ward has a significantly lower number of
children under the age of 15 (6.99%) compared with
the Bristol average (17.17%).
o Clifton Down Ward has a significantly higher number
of people between the ages of 16-24 (34.45%)
compared with the Bristol average (16.16%).
o Clifton Down Ward has a significantly higher number
of full-time students aged 18 or over (29.4%)
compared to the Bristol average (9.2%).

Child Poverty
Central Ward
o 52.1% of children live in poverty
Hotwells and Harbourside Ward
o 13% of children live in poverty
Clifton Ward
o 8.3% of children live in poverty
Clifton Down Ward
o 5.7% of children live in poverty

The Bristol Average for children living in poverty is 22%

Some older people - Even though Central Ward has a
Sources: significantly lower number of people of 65
than the Bristol average, there are a
Ward Profile Tool - Microsoft Power BI significant number in the other 3 wards.
- This group may be reliant on public
Office for National Statistics Population Estimates mid- transport when travelling into the central
2022 - Ward Mid-2022 population estinates by broad area for goods and services. The
age band (bristol.gov.uk) concessionary bus pass is available to
those of pensionable age within the Bristol
Census Data 2021 - Microsoft Power BI City Council area.
- Those aged 50 to 69 made the smallest
National Travel Survey 2021 proportion of trips using active modes with
29%. The proportion increased slightly to
Data: 32% for those aged 70 and over. (National
Travel Survey 2021)
Central Ward
o 2.24% of people are over the age of 65.
Hotwells and Harbourside Ward
o 7.74% of people are over the age of 65.
Clifton Ward
o 12.26% of people are over the age of 65.
Clifton Down Ward
o 8.32% of people are over the age of 65.

The overall Bristol average of those over the age of 65 is
12.79% of the population.
Sex (Female) - Fear of crime and crime rates are relevant
Sources: to this characteristic. The Central ward
reports the highest crime rates in Bristol.
Ward Profile Tool - Microsoft Power BI This can be attributable to being within a
city centre environment

Census Data 2021 - Microsoft Power BI

Page 106
Bristol Quality of Life Survey - Microsoft Power BI

Data:

Central Ward
o 48.3% (8,882) of people are recognised as female
o 17.5% of people had been a victim of sex
discrimination or harassment in the past year
Hotwells and Harbourside
o 47.8% (2,886) of people are recognised as female
o 13.9% of people had been a victim of sex
discrimination or harassment in the past year
Clifton Ward
o 51% (6,647) of people are recognised as female
o 8.3% of people had been a victim of sex discrimination
or harassment in the past year
Clifton Down Ward
o 50.8% (5,807) of people are recognised as female
o 11.9% of people had been a victim of sex
discrimination or harassment in the past year

The overall Bristol Average of people who had been a
victim of sex discrimination or harassment in the past
year was 10.9%

Sex (Male)
Sources:

Ward Profile Tool - Microsoft Power BI

[3] Census Data 2021 - Microsoft Power BI

Data:

Central Ward
o 51.7% (9,508) of people are recognised as male
Hotwells and Harbourside
o 52.2% (3,149) of people are recognised as male
Clifton Ward
o 49% (6,375) of people are recognised as male
Clifton Down Ward
o 49.2% (5,613) of people are recognised as male

Disability o Data for ‘Some older people’ also relevant
Sources: to this characteristic, please find ‘Some
older people’ section above.
Ward Profile Tool - Microsoft Power BI o All 4 wards have a slightly higher
percentage of people with no long-term
Census Data 2021 - Microsoft Power BI physical or mental health conditions when
compared to the Bristol average
Indices of Multiple Deprivation - Deprivation in Bristol o A significantly larger percentage of the
2019 (LSOA11) — Open Data Bristol Page 107 population in Central Ward and Hotwells
and Harbourside Ward believe that air
Deprivation in Bristol - Deprivation - bristol.gov.uk quality and traffic is a problem locally,
when compared to the Bristol average.

Data:

Central Ward
o 78.6% of people have no long-term physical or mental
health conditions
o 4.9% of people had been a victim of disability
discrimination or harassment in the past year
Hotwells and Harbourside Ward
o 78.2% of people have no long-term physical or mental
health conditions
o 0.4% of people had been a victim of disability
discrimination or harassment in the past year
Clifton Ward
o 78.2% of people have no long-term physical or mental
health conditions
o 4.6% of people had been a victim of disability
discrimination or harassment in the past year
Clifton Down Ward
o 77.9% of people have no long-term physical or mental
health conditions
o 1.3% of people had been a victim of disability
discrimination or harassment in the past year

The overall Bristol Average of people with no long-term
physical or mental health conditions is 75.8%

The overall Bristol Average of people who had been a
victim of disability discrimination or harassment in the
past year was 4.1%

Race o Both Central Ward and Harbourside and
Sources: Hotwells have a larger proportion of Black,
Asian and Minority Ethnic Group citizens than
Ward Profile Tool - Microsoft Power BI the Bristol Average. These wards also have a
significantly higher percentage of households
without access to cars or vans, when
Census Data 2021 - Microsoft Power BI compared to the Bristol average.
o Central and Clifton Down Ward demonstrated
a significantly higher percentage of victims of
Bristol Quality of Life Survey - Microsoft Power BI racial discrimination and/or harassment, when
compared to the rest of Bristol.
Data:
o Black, Asian and minority ethnic citizens in
Central Ward Bristol experience disparities in public
o 34.3% of people are from a Black, Asian and Minority transport inaccessibility and air quality.
Ethnic Group
o 10.8% of people had been a victim of racial
discrimination or harrassment in the past year
Hotwells and Harbourside Ward

Page 108
o 24.9% of people are from a Black, Asian and Minority
Ethnic Group
o 2.7% of people had been a victim of racial
discrimination or harassment in the past year
Clifton Ward
o 14.1% of people are from a Black, Asian and Minority
Ethnic Group
o 2.5% of people had been a victim of racial
discrimination or harassment in the past year
Clifton Down Ward
o 14.9% of people are from a Black, Asian and Minority
Ethnic Group
o 8.7% of people had been a victim of racial
discrimination or harassment in the past year

The overall Bristol Average of people from a Black, Asian
and Minority Ethnic Group is 18.9%

The overall Bristol Average of people who had been a
victim of racial discrimination or harassment in the past
year was 5.3%

Pregnancy and Maternity o Where there are Wards/areas with a higher
proportion of children, or with poor air quality,
Sources: or public transport provision issues, there is
likely to be disproportionate impact on
Ward Profile Tool - Microsoft Power BI Pregnancy and maternity

Census Data 2021 - Microsoft Power BI

Bristol Quality of Life Survey - Microsoft Power BI

The overall Bristol average for those who were pregnant
or who had given birth in the past 6 months and been a
victim of discrimination or harrassment was 2.4%
Religion and Belief o Fear of crime and crime rates are relevant to
this characteristic, please see the information
Sources: in the sections of the table above.

Ward Profile Tool - Microsoft Power BI

Census Data 2021 - Microsoft Power BI

Bristol Quality of Life Survey - Microsoft Power BI

Data:

Central Ward
o 3.7% of people had been a victim of religious
discrimination or harassment in the past year
Page 109
Hotwells and Harbourside Ward
o 4% of people had been a victim of religious
discrimination or harassment in the past year
Clifton Ward
o 2.2% of people had been a victim of religious
discrimination or harassment in the past year
Clifton Down Ward
o 0% of people had been a victim of religious
discrimination or harassment in the past year

The overall Bristol Average of people who had been a
victim of religious discrimination or harassment in the
past year was 1.9%

Gender reassignment o Fear of crime and crime rates are relevant to
this characteristic, please see the information
Sources: in the sections of the table above.

Ward Profile Tool - Microsoft Power BI

Census Data 2021 - Microsoft Power BI

Bristol Quality of Life Survey - Microsoft Power BI

Data:

The Bristol Average for transgender people who had faced
discrimination in the past year was 62.7%

Sexual Orientation o Fear of crime and crime rates are relevant to
this characteristic, please see the information
Sources: in the sections of the table above.

Ward Profile Tool - Microsoft Power BI

Census Data 2021 - Microsoft Power BI

Bristol Quality of Life Survey - Microsoft Power BI

Data:

Central Ward
o 5.3% of people had been a victim of discrimination or
harassment in the past year due to sexual orientation.
Hotwells and Harbourside Ward
o 2.8% of people had been a victim of discrimination or
harassment in the past year due to sexual orientation.
Clifton Ward
o 1.1% of people had been a victim of discrimination or
harassment in the past year due to sexual orientation.
Clifton Down Ward
Page 110
o 0% of people had been a victim of discrimination or
harassment in the past year due to sexual orientation.

The overall Bristol Average of people who had been a
victim of discrimination or harassment in the past year
due to sexual orientation was 2.6%

Poverty and Deprivation o Some of the areas of Central Ward fall
within the 10% most deprived areas in
Sources: England.
o Clifton, Clifton Down and Hotwells and
Ward Profile Tool - Microsoft Power BI
Harbourside are generally some of the
least deprived areas in England.
Census Data 2021 - Microsoft Power BI o Car ownership, public transport provision,
fear of crime, and air quality are all
relevant data to this protected
Bristol Quality of Life Survey - Microsoft Power BI characteristic.

Indices of multiple deprivation - Deprivation in Bristol
2019 (LSOA11) — Open Data Bristol

Data:

Indices of Multiple Deprivation

o The Indices of Deprivation are a unique measure of
relative deprivation at a small local area level (Lower-
layer Super Output Areas) across England and have
been produced by the Ministry of Housing,
Communities and Local Government and its
predecessors in similar way since 2000. The Indices of
Deprivation 2019 (IoD2019) is the most recent release.
o The Indices provide a set of relative measures of
deprivation for small across England, based on seven
different domains, or facets, of deprivation:
• Income Deprivation
• Employment Deprivation
• Education, Skills and Training Deprivation
• Health Deprivation and Disability
• Crime
• Barriers to Housing and Services
• Living Environment Deprivation
Page 111
o Deprivation is measured in a broad way to encompass
a wide range of aspects of an individual’s living
conditions.
o Each of the domains above are constructed from a
basket of different data datasets, or indicators. As far
as is possible, each indicator is based on data from the
most recent time point available. It must be noted that
the last time this survey was completed was 2019.

Car Availability

Central Ward
o 57.3% of households have no car or van
Hotwells and Harbourside Ward
o 39.9% of households have no car or van
Clifton Ward
o 29.9% of households have no car or van
Clifton Down Ward
o 30.9% of households have no car or van

The Bristol Average of households with no car or van is
26.2%

Crime and Safety o Fear of crime is higher in Central Ward and
Hotwells and Harbourside Wardwhen
Sources: compared to the Bristol average.
o Clifton Down Ward and Clifton Ward all have a
Ward Profile Tool - Microsoft Power BI significantly lower crime rate when compared
to the Bristol average.
o Central, Hotwells and Harbourside and,
Census Data 2021 - Microsoft Power BI Lawrence Hill all have a significantly higher
crime rate than the Bristol average.

Bristol Quality of Life Survey - Microsoft Power BI

Data

Figures for crime offences and youth offenders are a total
for the respective year. The number of youth offenders are
used as the indicator rather than the number of offences
committed. Crime offence and youth offender data is
expressed as a rate per 1,000 of the ward population
within the cohort selected (i.e. crime data).

Data:

Central
o 421.8 crimes per 1000 people
Hotwells and Harbourside
o 62.7 crimes per 1000 people
Page 112
Clifton
o 62.7 crimes per 1000 people
Clifton Down
o 63.3 crimes per 1000 people

The Bristol Average is 121 crimes per 1000 people

Fear of Crime statistics are also relevant, from the Bristol
Quality of Life Survey
Additional comments:

o 2.2 Do you currently monitor relevant activity by the following protected
characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☒ Gender Reassignment
☐ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☒ Pregnancy/Maternity ☒ Race
☒ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☒ Sexual Orientation

2.3 Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
Where there are gaps in the evidence, or you don’t have enough information about some equality groups, include an
equality action to find out in section 4.2 below. This doesn’t mean that you can’t complete the assessment without
the information, but you need to follow up the action and if necessary, review the assessment later. If you are
unable to fill in the gaps, then state this clearly with a justification.
For workforce related proposals all relevant characteristics may not be included in HR diversity reporting (e.g.
pregnancy/maternity). For smaller teams diversity data may be redacted. A high proportion of not known/not
disclosed may require an action to address under-reporting.
Out-of-date data

Data from the 2021 census was most likely impacted by Covid-19 and related lockdowns. Transport and
commuting data in particular is likely to be inaccurate in 2023 and so this would be useful to re-assess.
This also applies to the indices of multiple deprivation study, carried out in 2019, and the Bristol quality
of life survey, conducted in 2023. The Ward profile tool uses more up to date data in areas, with
population estimates coming from 2022/23, using the census as a baseline for the estimates.

Seldom-heard-groups

Demographic data reveals groups that are sometimes seldom-heard-from in decision making. All three
wards have data similar to the Bristol average but are still important to note and consider for
stakeholder engagement.

Through extensive engagement with key stakeholders, we may begin to identify gaps in our information
gathering. Some topics we will explore include local challenges and solutions to accessing sustainable
transport modes and the barriers faced by people from some of the protected characteristics: for
example, the Quality of Life survey data does not include ward information for the category of “%
pregnant or who have given birth in past 6 months, who have suffered discrimination or harassment”.
This is the sort of question that would be useful to explore in the context of encouraging sustainable
transport. This group could be disproportionately affected if they don’t have access to a vehicle, so
reliable and safe public transport is important for this group.

Page 113
2.4 How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
You will nearly always need to involve and consult with internal and external stakeholders during your assessment.
The extent of the engagement will depend on the nature of the proposal or change. This should usually include
individuals and groups representing different relevant protected characteristics. Please include details of any
completed engagement and consultation and how representative this had been of Bristol’s diverse communities.
Include the main findings of any engagement and consultation in Section 2.1 above.

If you are managing a workforce change process or restructure please refer to Managing a change process or
restructure (sharepoint.com) for advice on consulting with employees etc. Relevant stakeholders for engagement
about workforce changes may include e.g. staff-led groups and trades unions as well as affected staff.
Throughout the project there has been continued engagement with a range of internal and external
stakeholders, which has been a priority due to the scale of the scheme and the local and historical
importance of the surrounding area.

Highlighted below are internal stakeholders who we have engaged throughout the development in
the scheme. All internal stakeholders have a responsibility to recognise protected characteristics when
making decisions. Internal stakeholders include:

• Highways Maintenance
• Strategic Highway Maintenance
• Parks and Green Spaces
• Equalities Team
• Passenger transport
• Ecology
• Tree management
• Public realm/Urban Design/Planning/Heritage
• Street lighting
• Flood Risk
• Structures Team
• Sustainable Transport
• Traffic signals
• TRO Team
• Transport Development Management , Transport Development Management
• Parking Services
• Road Safety and Local Engineering (Road Safety)
• Road Safety and Local Engineering (Walking and Cycling)
• Property
• Strategic Transport Policy and Strategy
• Highway Network Management
• Highways Drainage and Technical Specification
• Changes to Classified Road Network and PRN
• Elected Members

There is an extensive external stakeholder list which can provided on request. A few examples of
external stakeholders which we have engaged include:

• Bristol Walking Alliance
• Bristol Cycling Campaign
• Bristol Civic Society
• University of Bristol
Page 114
• Bristol City Centre Business Improvement Distrcit (BID)
• Bristol Property Agents Association
• St George’s Bristol (music venue)
• Park Street Traders
• First West of England
• Stagecoach
• Business West
• Cycling Works Bristol
• Bristol Blue Licensed Taxi Association
• Brandon Hill Residents Association
• Clifton and Hotwells Improvement Society
• Charlotte Street Residents Group
• Oxfam Shop, Park Street
• City Centre revitalisation board

We have also focussed on specific external equalities-based groups when conducting our engagement.
These include:

• WECIL/BPAC
o Meetings conducted on the 30th November 2021
• Older Peoples Forum
o Dialogue through email
• Commission on Race Equality
o Dialogue through email
• Bristol Disability Equality Commission
o Meetings conducted on the 30th November 2021
• Bristol Women’s Voice
o Dialogue through email
• Disability Commission
o Meeting conducted on the 28th October 2024
• Sight Loss Council
o Meeting conducted on the 30th November 2021
• Bristol Women’s Commission
o Meeting via the transport board
• Public Transport Safety Equality Group
o Meeting conducted on the 16th December 2021

Elements of the design have been influenced as a product of these meetings:
- Bus stop bypasses were discussed in detail.
- Development of continuous footways was discussed.
- Reallocation of road space was discussed with groups to help understand the balance between
walking, wheeling, cycling and public transport.

Public Consultation Process (2021-2022)

• An initial public engagement was held in early 2021, followed by a formal public engagement
published in 2022.
• The public engagement, titled: ‘Consultation Report on improvements to the number 2 bus route
(A37/A4018)’ was held to engage the public on several proposals throughout the whole of the
number 2 bus route. It was agreed the team would hold a consultation process from 29 November
2021 until 28 January 2022 and it was for 8 weeks rather than the normal 6-week period as this
Page 115
covered the Christmas period. The consultation covered proposals for the entire transport corridor,
but due to the length of the corridor the consultation was broken down into 3 sections known as the
north, central and south sections.
• The overall work in which the public consultation focuses on was later divided into 5 distinct work-
packages, with the Park Street, Triangle and Queens Road works (Work Package 3) drawing evidence
from the ‘Central’ section of the report
• A summarisation of the results of the report are as followed:
o Queens Road - 62% of respondents agreed and strongly agreed with the proposed
changes
o Triangle - 52% of respondents agreed and strongly agreed with the proposed changes
o Park Street - 45% of respondents agreed and strongly agreed and 49% disagreed and
strongly disagreed with the proposed changes
o College Green - 52% of respondents agreed and strongly agreed with the proposed
changes

2.5 How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
Explain how you will continue to engage with stakeholders throughout the course of planning and delivery. Please
describe where more engagement and consultation is required and set out how you intend to undertake it. Include
any targeted work to seek the views of under-represented groups. If you do not intend to undertake it, please set
out your justification. You can ask the Equality and Inclusion Team for help in targeting particular groups.
We have had a continued dialogue with internal stakeholders throughout the process of developing the
scheme.

External stakeholder information exercise (November 2024)

• A mass information exercise is currently being planned to launch in November 2024. The aim of this
exercise is to inform all external stakeholders and the public on the proposed changes, following the
public consultation and consequential design changes made as a result.
• We aim to inform stakeholders and the public through:
o Regular meetings
o Potential press conference
o Press releases
o Information (informative posters/video/webpages on changes)
o Meeting with stakeholders directly
Page 116
o Letters/ leaflets posted to those who live within the zone of influence of the scheme.
o A focus of this information exercise will be to have a regular dialogue with equalities
groups.

Step 3: Who might the proposal impact?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered above and the characteristics protected by the Equality Act 2010.
Also include details of existing issues for particular groups that you are aware of and are seeking to address or
mitigate through this proposal. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying potential impacts etc.
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com)

3.1 Does the proposal have any potentially adverse impacts on people based on their
protected or other relevant characteristics?
Consider sub-categories and how people with combined characteristics (e.g. young women) might have particular
needs or experience particular kinds of disadvantage.
Where mitigations indicate a follow-on action, include this in the ‘Action Plan’ Section 4.2 below.
GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many groups)
The scheme designs aim to address barriers for people who want to access quality public transport and
active travel infrastructure, particularly those with protected characteristic groups. Inclusive
infrastructure needs to consider people of all ages and ability.

Access to quality public transport infrastructure is a necessity for a clean and healthy society in which car
and motor use is reduced and people are able to use reliable bus travel as an alternative to motorised
vehicles. In order to achieve this, we must utilise bus prioritisation in order to reallocate road space in
order to limit delay and make bus travel a more attractive option. Many people in protected groups rely
on bus transport to access work/ education and further economic opportunity. This is crucial for
economic growth within the city. Examples of this include younger people, in which there is significant
transport poverty, as young people are less likely to own a car and are more likely to rely on public
transport and active travel options. Further to this, some older people who can no longer drive due to
health reasons rely on public transport heavily, as this group may be reliant on public transport when
travelling into the central area for goods and services. This is detailed in the following sections.

We also have an ambition to make walking, wheeling and cycling the natural choices for short journeys
or as part of a longer journey with supporting objectives to increase cycling and walking levels. Following
guidance such as Cycle Infrastructure Design LTN 1/20 and Inclusive Mobility, this supports the delivery
of high-quality walking, wheeling and cycle infrastructure to deliver this ambition and objective; and
reflects current good practice, standards and legal requirements. The development of scheme designs
also learn from local best practice, previous delivery and historic discussions and decisions. Active travel
improvements should not negatively affect anyone, although removal of parking for road space
reallocation may impact those who rely on motor vehicles. Interventions such as new or improved
crossings anecdotally help a lot of people who use the facility but especially groups such as some older
people, black, Asian and minoritised ethic and disabled people.

On the other hand, a reduction in carriageway allocation and road closures could reduce access and
lengthen journey times for the same groups who rely on cars and struggle to use active travel or public
transport modes. Altered street configuration could create issues for Disabled people’s access along
footways and familiarity with surroundings. We will seek to provide strict design criteria for pavement
licencing to ensure that pavements remain a safe and uninterrupted space for people to use.

Page 117
A reduction in both parking spaces outside shops and in local centres could affect access for Disabled
people to services, although the scheme seeks to retain and increase Disabled parking. However, a
reduction in overall parking could affect access for pregnant people and some older people, who are
more likely to rely upon a private car to access shops and services. This can have a knock-on effect on
walking distances and the requirement for provision to break up journeys (seating/resting
places). Providing well designed, conveniently located disabled parking within the immediate zone of
influence, is crucial and parking has been allocated around residential areas and areas where amenities
are located. The changes in the scheme will not restrict anyone’s ability to be dropped off outside of
their property or amenities – there may be increased diversion, but access is not limited. Disabled
organisations were consulted throughout the planning and development of the designs so that
removal/relocation of parking was fully considered. Further to this, access to amenities and people’s
houses was also discussed, and this influenced the design.

Wayfinding and legibility for navigating the Triangle may also be challenging but can be addressed
through upgrades to signage.

Engagement & Communication

We are aware of the barriers to engagement in the process of consulting on the scheme if businesses,
residents and visitors are digitally illiterate. Only 47.8% of people in Bristol aged 65+ say they are
comfortable using digital services, compared to 81.8% overall. We need to use a range of
communication channels and combine conventional engagement methods, such as telephone
interviews, radio and print, with virtual platforms and interactive tools, such as online interactive maps
and surveys, to reach a representative audience. This is particularly true of engaging with market traders
during any consultation activity.

It is vital that all communications are in plain English and that Easy Read versions are available (or on
request if appropriate). People who do not speak English as a main language will require local updates
and information in plain English, and alternative languages/formats to address the risk of misinformation
being spread e.g., through social media. This is being met through the location, language and design of
tangible communications within the public realm.

Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic-led small businesses may lack information about the support
available to them from the government particularly taxi drivers, restaurants, cafes and hotels. Equally,
those from more deprived parts of the city may not necessarily be engaged in the scheme or feel they
can contribute in a meaningful way on balance.

PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Children Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • Almost one third of children are in poverty, a greater proportion than for any
other age group. This increases to nearly 50% for lone-parent families.
• The availability and affordability of transport can contribute to children’s access
to important resources.
• Active travel presents an opportunity to promote health and wellbeing among
children. This is particularly important for children who are more likely to
develop childhood obesity due to further intersectional characteristics.
• The effects of air pollution are particularly significant for the health of children.

Page 118
• Children from a lower socio-economic background are also more likely to be
exposed to high levels of pollution due to living in densely populated urban
areas.
Mitigations: - The implementation/improvement of active travel elements throughout the
scheme which re-prioritise road-space towards active travel alternatives
presents an opportunity to promote health and wellbeing among children. This
is particularly important for children who are more likely to develop childhood
obesity due to further intersectional characteristics.
- Reallocation of road space also greatly reduces traffic numbers, lowering
pollution levels.
- Safety is also improved with segregation on cycle-ways and widened and
continuous footways, increasing confidence for children and young people in
using the cycle network.
- Reallocation of road-space through bus gates/bus lanes helps to decrease
journey time and increase reliability. This makes buses a more attractive travel
option.
- Creation of public realm spaces which children can use.

Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • Identified as a group at risk of transport poverty
• From the age of 16 onwards, the bus becomes an important tool in enabling
young people to access employment and training.
• Vehicle ownership tends to be low among younger age groups partly due to
the costs of learning to drive, as well as maintaining a vehicle and the
associated insurance costs, making this group increasingly reliant on public
transport.
• Transport affordability and availability are key challenges for younger people
relying on public transport to access work, education, and other activities.
• Safety and personal security are also important aspects of the mobility
experience for younger people. Younger people are more likely to be involved
in crime on public transport; as both perpetrators and victims of low-level
disorder and anti-social behaviour.
• Fear of antisocial behaviour on the part of younger people (rightly or wrongly),
and lack of perceived safety when using public transport can deter young
people from using public transport
Mitigations: - Reallocation of road-space through bus gates/bus lanes helps to decrease
journey time and increase reliability. This makes buses a more attractive travel
option.
- Identified as a group at risk of transport poverty. Alternative transport options
to the private vehicle e.g., safter active travel routes will most benefit those
who are unable to access private transport options.
- The implementation/improvement of active travel elements throughout the
scheme which re-prioritise road-space towards active travel alternatives
presents an opportunity to promote health and wellbeing among young people.
- Public realm improvements along park street/ brand new public realm scheme
outside the Victoria Rooms allows for space outside the university for young
people to use.
Age: Older people Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • Identified as a group at higher risk of transport poverty.
• Identified as a group at risk of poverty.

Page 119
• Access to appropriate forms of transport can help some older people avail
themselves of goods, services, employment and other activities, with public
transport playing a crucial role in remaining connected and maintain
independency when some older people are unable to drive.
• Some older people are more likely to be Disabled or have a long-term health
problem that can affect their ability to use transport, including: mobility
impairments, hearing impairments and cognitive impairments.
• Some older people with a who are Disabled or have a long-term health
condition might also be more reliant on staff on public transport to help enable
them to undertake a journey.
• Some older people may be less confident in using digital services therefore may not
be confident in finding accurate and up to date pre-travel information, including
timetables, the availability of accessible infrastructure (such as Disabled parking),
and information about ticketing and staff availability when using public transport.
• Research also suggested that uptake of shared mobility services is lower
amongst some older people and some disabled people. This is related to
barriers such as the lack of on-demand accessible options, unfamiliarity with
the technology needed to book services and inability to use digital payment on
a smartphone, and not being comfortable with unfamiliar ride hailing drivers.
• Volunteer transportation systems can more easily serve some older and
disabled people due to higher client engagement, lower costs and higher user
familiarity with the service providers.
• Some older people in the 80 to 90 age groups tend disproportionately to be
women living alone.
• Some older people become more reliant on taxis and lifts from family and
friends as a transport mode, providing a supplement to the publicly accessible
fixed-route bus and rail system.
• Research from Age UK has found that an improved provision of active transport
(including walking and cycling) could disproportionately benefit some older
people. Increased provision of active transport is likely to improve the amount
of physical activity, which is linked to better cognitive performance, better
mental health outcomes and reduce overall morbidity and mortality.
• Currently only 8% of men and 3% of women over the age of 65 in the UK cycle, a
much lower proportion compared to both the general population in the UK and
those over the age of 65 in European countries.
• A reduction in parking spaces could impact some older people who are more reliant
in their private vehicles to access services.
Mitigations: • Potential improved bus priority could provide an improved transport mode for
a group for which bus travel is an important means to access services,
amenities, and to visit family and friends. Public transport plays a crucial role in
remaining connected and maintaining independency when some older people
are unable to drive.
• Some Older Disabled people or people who have a long-term health condition
might also be more reliant on staff on public transport to help enable them to
undertake a journey. Improved bus service reliability can support people from
this group to use the local services.
• Appropriately designed and conveniently located Disabled parking within the
immediate zone of influence will be increased with improved access.
• To improve appropriately designed walking and cycling infrastructure to comply
with national guidance following LTN1/20 to encourage all ages and abilities,
including segregated cycleways and widened footways.

Page 120
o Further to this, benches and street furniture placed along the route,
especially on Park Street (which has a gradient of 10.3% at its steepest
point), allowing for rest spaces.
• For those who can walk, cycle, and wheel, the provision of quieter streets with
less traffic will provide a more attractive environment for people to access and
travel actively on.
• Improved quality in active travel options can provide disproportionately positive
impacts for some older people.
• Wider/ continuous footways allow for proper segregation from traffic and
improves accessibility as pedestrians do not have to negotiate kerbs on a steep
gradient. This also improves access for wheelchairs/ mobility scooters.
o This improves safety/ increases comfort for pedestrians.
• Although continuous footways provide a vast number of benefits for many
older and disabled people, it should be noted they can present a challenge to
those with visual impairments. We are in a continued dialogue with visual
impairment groups about the materials we will use to create a solution that
works for all.
• Public realm improvements create a spaces for all to use throughout the
scheme
• A reduction in both parking spaces outside shops and in local centres could affect
access for some older people to services. This can have a knock-on effect on
walking distances and the requirement for provision to break up
journeys (seating/resting places). Some older people who are also Disabled will be
able to access Disabled parking. Providing well designed, conveniently located
Disabled parking within the immediate zone of influence, is crucial and parking has
been allocated around residential areas and areas where amenities are located. The
changes in the scheme will not restrict anyone’s ability to be dropped off outside of
their property or amenities – there may be increased diversion, but access is not
limited. Blue badge holders may also park on double yellow lines throughout the
scheme for 3 hours. Disabled organisations were consulted throughout the planning
and development of the designs so that removal/relocation of parking was fully
considered. Further to this, access to amenities and people’s houses was also
discussed, and this influenced the design.

Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • Undertaking an analysis of current transport trends among Disabled people it
is important to note that Disabled people are not a homogenous group, their
needs and abilities can vary greatly depending on the nature and severity of
their Disability.
• Families that include a Disabled person have always been at greater risk of poverty
(JRF 2017: 25)
• Disabled people face a range of challenges in relation to mobility and various
modes of transportation.
• Primarily, key obstacles relate to a lack of accessible infrastructure, at stops,
stations and other locations, as well as in use of vehicles themselves.
• Where people are unable to rely on public transport either due to structural
barriers or because of geographical location, they are likely to increasingly rely
on more expensive services such as taxis and private hire vehicles (PHVs) –
affecting the affordability of travel.
• Accessible and inclusive information relating to routes and tickets is also a key
challenge. Adequate information, alongside staff presence and assistance can
help to make Disabled passengers feel safer when travelling, as well as making
journeys easier and more stress-free.
Page 121
• Active travel modes for Disabled people are reliant on well marked shared
spaces and clear pedestrian routes, where these are present, modes such has
walking and cycling can have both mental and physical health benefits for
Disabled people.
• Appropriate transport provision enables Disabled people to participate in their
community, maintain social networks, and access employment, education,
healthcare and other services.
• The unemployment rate in the UK for Disabled people was 6.7% in 2019,
despite this rate having reduced, it is still nearly double the national
unemployment rate. Evidence shows that difficulty in accessing transport is the
second most common barrier to work among disabled people.
• While Disabled people tend to travel less than non-Disabled people, many are
nonetheless reliant on public transport. There can be large variances in a
person’s travel patterns depending on their Disability and its severity. For
example, according to the Department for Transport’s ‘Disabled people’s travel
behaviour and attitudes to travel’ report, having a learning or physical
Disability correlates strongly to travel by bus. Around 60% of Disabled people
have no access to a car and use the bus around 20% more than their non-
Disabled counterparts.
• Disabled people are more likely to report negative and problematic journey
experiences, alongside limited awareness of viable alternatives. For some Disabled
people, the attitude of staff and other passengers, as well as the unpredictability of
public transport (both timings and capacity), prevents them from using public
transport. For some neurodivergent people, a lack of routine or unexpected events
can become overwhelming, leading to high levels of stress and anxiety.
• A reduction in both parking spaces outside shops and in local centres could
affect access on Disabled people, who are more likely to rely upon a private car
to access shops and services.
• Altered street configuration could create issues for Disabled people’s access
along footways and familiarity with surroundings.
• Low noise vehicles (scooters/electric vehicles) could have implications on the
visually and hearing impaired and can thus compromise the perception of safety.
• Reduced parking may potentially impact some Disabled people who rely on their
own private vehicle to access services and amenities.
Mitigations: • Some Older Disabled people or people who have a long-term health condition
might are more reliant on staff on public transport to help enable them to
undertake a journey. Improved bus service reliability can support people from
this group to use the local services.
• Appropriately designed and conveniently located Disabled parking within the
immediate zone of influence will be increased with improved access.
• To improve appropriately designed walking and cycling infrastructure to comply
with national guidance following LTN1/20 to encourage all ages and abilities,
including segregated cycleways and widened footways.
o Further to this, benches and street furniture placed along the route,
especially on Park Street (which has a gradient of 10.3% at its steepest
point), allowing for rest spaces.
• For those who can walk, cycle, and wheel, the provision of quieter streets with
less traffic will provide a more attractive environment for people to access and
travel actively on.
• Improved quality in active travel options can provide disproportionately
positive impacts for some older people.
• Wider/ continuous footways allow for proper segregation from traffic and
improves accessibility as pedestrians do not have to negotiate kerbs on a steep
gradient. This also improves access for wheelchairs/ mobility scooters.
Page 122
o This improves safety/ increases comfort for pedestrians.
• Although continuous footways provide a vast number of benefits for many
older and disabled people, it should be noted they can present a challenge to
those with visual impairments. We are in a continued dialogue with visual
impairment groups about the materials we will use to create a solution that
works for all.
• Wayfinding and legibility for navigating the route will be addressed through
upgraded signage.
• Suitable active travel infrastructure with appropriate lining, surfacing, paving etc. –
no floating bus stops.
• A reduction in both parking spaces outside shops and in local centres could affect
access for Disabled people to services, although the scheme seeks to retain and
increase Disabled parking. However, a reduction in overall parking could affect
access for pregnant people and some older people, who are more likely to rely
upon a private car to access shops and services. This can have a knock-on effect on
walking distances and the requirement for provision to break up
journeys (seating/resting places). Providing well designed, conveniently located
disabled parking within the immediate zone of influence, is crucial and parking has
been allocated around residential areas and areas where amenities are located. The
changes in the scheme will not restrict anyone’s ability to be dropped off outside of
their property or amenities – there may be increased diversion, but access is not
limited. Disabled organisations were consulted throughout the planning and
development of the designs so that removal/relocation of parking was fully
considered. Further to this, access to amenities and people’s houses was also
discussed, and this influenced the design.
• Blue badge holders may also park on double yellow lines throughout the scheme
for 3 hours.
References Joseph Rowntree Foundation UK Poverty Report 2017 - UK Poverty 2017 | Joseph Rowntree Foundation (jrf.org.uk)
Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Women
• A lack of adequate public transport creates barriers to women accessing
employment and educational opportunities. This is related to their patterns of
participation in the labour market.
• Less women across the UK hold a driving license compared to men (67% versus
77%). Women also tend to not have access to a car, particularly during the day as
they either cannot afford one, or the family car is being used by a partner.
• Kamruzzaman and Hine (2012) highlighted that an understanding of access to
activity spaces can shed light on the gendered dynamics of social exclusion. For
example, women had more transport constraints than men, as childcare
constraints meant they were less likely to take longer journeys. They were also less
likely to travel at night or on weekends due to perceptions of safety, stemming
from a lack of transport during these periods
• Having less access to private means of transport such as bicycles, motorcycles and
cars, women are inclined to take work closer to home, often in the informal sector,
which may limit their opportunities for finding better paid or higher skilled
positions. This may be exacerbated by a limited availability of part-time work or
work which fits around school hours.
• Research evidences that gender inequality in cycling is common, with low levels of
cycling among women compared to men. This could be due to cultural factors that
remain in place despite an increase in the promotion of active travel. Promoting
gender quality and normalising cycling culturally could benefit women in increasing
the numbers of those cycling regularly.
• Caring responsibilities also tend to disproportionately fall to women and often
require making multiple short journeys during a day – for example, to drop off
Page 123
children at school, visit family members and shop for food – which creates an
additional challenge if private transport is not available. In such cases public
transport services may not sufficiently interconnected, requiring journeys with
several changes and a long commuting time. A reduction in parking may
disproportionately impact women due to them having to incorporate other things
into their daily commute to work (trip chaining).
• When involved in a road accident, women are also more likely to fall casualties
than men.
• While fewer women tend to have access to private transport, women make greater
use of taxis and PHVs in comparison to men, increasing with older age. This is
despite challenges around costs and affordability as well as personal safety when
using a PHV or taxi as passengers can feel vulnerable and concerned due to
travelling with strangers.
• Feelings of personal safety and security are thus a recognised barrier to women
using public transport.
Men
• Younger men aged 16-19 are more likely to be victims of crime on the public
transport network compared to men of all other age groups.
• Even though men tend to undertake fewer trips per year when travelling, they tend
to travel further distances. Private vehicle use and ownership is also higher
amongst men, with evidence showing differences in driving habits, as well as a
higher propensity to be employed in sectors that require driving, such as freight and
logistics and public transport.
• Men are in fact more likely to be involved in road traffic accidents across all
transport modes this is also due to their higher propensity to use certain transport
modes.
• Younger men are also more likely to be road casualties.
• With pedestrians, female pedestrians account for just over half of journeys made by
foot (52%), but men make up the majority of pedestrian casualties (57%).

Mitigations: • Bus stops regularly throughout the residential area and community areas.
• Implementation of new and maintenance of existing Appropriate CCTV/lighting
measures which contribute to the perception of safety for public transport users
and those who use active modes will be in scope throughout development and
engagement.
• Appropriate surveillance such as CCTV and active surveillance, as well as
appropriate lighting in public realm areas to promote safety
• Continued conversations with the Police and representative from Bristol night-time
economy regarding safety in the area.
• The scheme is designed to improve the quality, safety, and accessibility of the active
travel route.
• Walking, cycling, and wheeling are intended to be more attractive options for
parents with young children e.g., trips to school.
• The provision of improved infrastructure to support cycling should have a positive
impact on women, who have lower levels of uptake compared to men
• A reduction in overall parking could affect access for carers, who are more likely to
rely upon a private car to access shops and services. This can have a knock-on effect
on walking distances and the requirement for provision to break up
journeys (seating/resting places). Providing well designed, conveniently located
parking within the immediate zone of influence, is crucial and parking has been
allocated around residential areas and areas where amenities are located. The
changes in the scheme will not restrict anyone’s ability to be dropped off outside of
their property or amenities – there may be increased diversion, but access is not
limited. Page 124
References Kamruzzaman, M & Hine, J 2012, 'Analysis of rural activity spaces and transport disadvantage using a multi-method
approach', Transport Policy, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 105-120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2011.09.007
Sexual Orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • As with religious and faith and other protected characteristic groups, safety, and
security – and perceptions of safety and security – when using public spaces, and
public transport is a key issue for LGBTQIA+ people.
• Improvements in all aspects of transport safety, including transport infrastructure
that ensures journeys can be undertaken in a safe, reliable, and efficient manner,
would improve feelings of personal safety and present a beneficial opportunity to
all vulnerable groups when travelling, including LGBTQIA+ people.

Mitigations: • Bus stops regularly throughout the residential area and community areas.
• Implementation of new and maintenance of existing Appropriate CCTV/lighting
measures which contribute to the perception of safety for public transport users
and those who use active modes will be in scope throughout development and
engagement.
• Appropriate surveillance such as CCTV and active surveillance, as well as
appropriate lighting in public realm areas to promote safety
• Continued conversations with the Police and representative from Bristol night-time
economy regarding safety in the area.

Pregnancy / Maternity Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • A reduction in both parking spaces outside shops and in local centres could affect
access on pregnant women, who are more likely to rely upon a private car to access
shops and services.
• Evidence also suggests that, when private transport is available, parents with young
children might chose it as a preferred transport method due to its convenience and
perceived safety.
• Similar to disabled people, and some older people, the accessibility and design of
physical spaces can also affect pregnant people and parents’ ability to travel freely
with small children, especially if using pushchairs.
• Exposure to poor air quality and pollutants can also affect foetal development and
cause low birth weights, premature births at well as stillbirth and miscarriage, as
well as having long-lasting effects on the health of babies.
• The scheme will require the removal or relocation of vehicle parking. In areas where
disabled parking bays are located and may be subject to change, we will engage
with the relevant groups to assess the impact and develop options which mitigate
any negative impact with these groups. However, general use parking, which may
be used by some older people or pregnant people with reduced mobility who may
not have access to disabled parking, must be considered.

Mitigations: • Bus stops regularly throughout the residential area and community areas.
• The accessibility and design of physical spaces can also affect pregnant people
and parents’ ability to travel freely with small children, especially if using
pushchairs. By prioritising active and sustainable modes of transport, the
scheme is intended to provide improved actual, as well as perceived safety.
• Implementation of new and maintenance of existing Appropriate CCTV/lighting
measures which contribute to the perception of safety for public transport users
and those who use active modes will be in scope throughout development and
engagement.
• Appropriate surveillance such as CCTV and active surveillance, as well as
appropriate lighting in public realm areas to promote safety
• A reduction in overall parking could affect access for pregnant people and some
older people, who are more likely to rely upon a private car to access shops and
Page 125
services. This can have a knock-on effect on walking distances and the requirement
for provision to break up journeys (seating/resting places). Providing well designed,
conveniently located disabled parking within the immediate zone of influence, is
crucial, and parking has been allocated around residential areas and areas where
amenities are located. The changes in the scheme will not restrict anyone’s ability
to be dropped off outside of their property or amenities – there may be increased
diversion, but access is not limited. Disabled organisations were consulted
throughout the planning and development of the designs so that
removal/relocation of parking was fully considered. Further to this, access to
amenities and people’s houses was also discussed, and this influenced the design.

Gender reassignment Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • As with other protected characteristic groups, safety, and security – and
perceptions of safety and security – when using public spaces, and public transport
is a key issue for transgender people.
• Improvements in all aspects of transport safety, including transport infrastructure
that ensures journeys can be undertaken in a safe, reliable, and efficient manner,
would improve feelings of personal safety and present a beneficial opportunity to
all vulnerable groups when travelling, including transgender people.
• Measures that would improve feelings of safety and thus confidence in travel
would present an opportunity for this group; including infrastructure measures such
as CCTV at public transport infrastructure and on transport services, and the
improved visibility of staff in areas where people feel particularly vulnerable, again,
including public transport. The training of transport staff to ensure that they are
able to offer appropriate support to transgender passengers would further support
greater confidence in travel by this group.
Mitigations: • Bus stops regularly throughout the residential area and community areas.
• Implementation of new and maintenance of existing Appropriate CCTV/lighting
measures which contribute to the perception of safety for public transport users
and those who use active modes will be in scope throughout development and
engagement.
• Appropriate surveillance such as CCTV and active surveillance, as well as
appropriate lighting in public realm areas to promote safety
• Continued conversations with the Police and representatives from Bristol night-
time economy regarding safety in the area.

Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • Black and Minority Ethnic-led small businesses may lack information about the
support available to them from the government particularly taxi drivers,
restaurants, cafes and hotels. Equally, those from more deprived parts of the city
may not necessarily be engaged in the scheme or feel they can contribute in a
meaningful way on balance.
• Black, Asian, and minority ethnic households consistently have the highest rates of
poverty, and White British households have the lowest.
• Adults from Asian, Black or other ethnic groups took substantially fewer trips per
person in 2017 than those from white or mixed groups.
• There is some disparity when looking at figures for people from a Black, Asian and
minority ethnic background in relation to walking and cycling. DfT walking and
cycling statistics suggest that people from a mixed ethnicity background were most
likely to walk for travel once a week.
• In terms of cycling, DfT data suggests that Black and Asian adults are least likely to
cycle.

Page 126
• It has been highlighted in research that people from a Black, Asian and minority
ethnic background fear racial attacks when using public transport, thus potentially
causing a barrier to their use of transport networks.
• Higher level of air pollution exposure is linked to the high proportion of Black, Asian
and minority ethnic communities living in densely populated urban areas where air
pollution is highest.
• Access to transport for some people is tied closely to geography, and infrequent
public transport services, particularly in the evening and at weekends, can impact
the type of employment people are able to access and can, for example, affect the
ability to undertake shift work. Research has found that this was particularly the
case for ethnic minority groups concentrated in more deprived areas.

Mitigations: • By providing safe, accessible, and direct infrastructure to support and prioritise
active and sustainable modes of travel, people from Black, Asian, and minority
ethnic groups can be disproportionately positively impacted by regarding the
uptake of these modes, given they are currently disparity in comparison with white
groups.
• Implementation of new and maintenance of existing Appropriate CCTV/lighting
measures which contribute to the perception of safety for public transport users
and those who use active modes will be in scope throughout development and
engagement.
• Appropriate surveillance such as CCTV and active surveillance, as well as
appropriate lighting in public realm areas to promote safety.
• Continued conversations with the Police and representatives from Bristol night-
time economy regarding safety in the area.
Religion or Belief Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐

Potential impacts: • Safety, and perceptions of safety, are particularly important for a number of
groups when using the pedestrian environment and public transport. This includes
people from particular religious or faith communities, for whom concern about
hate crime is a particular issue.
• In some cases, older generations may not have English as a first language, while
younger generations may have a large number of children. Barriers faced for
people with multiple children include cost, journey planning and ease.
• The geographical distribution of faith schools means that younger people at these
schools may have to travel further distances to access a particular school.

Mitigations: • Bus stops regularly throughout the residential area and community areas.
• Implementation of new and maintenance of existing Appropriate CCTV/lighting
measures which contribute to the perception of safety for public transport users
and those who use active modes will be in scope throughout development and
engagement.
• Appropriate surveillance such as CCTV and active surveillance, as well as
appropriate lighting in public realm areas to promote safety
• Continued conversations with the Police and representatives from Bristol night-
time economy regarding safety in the area.
Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
civil partnership
Potential impacts: There is no current evidence to suggest that this protected characteristic group might
experience transport differently today.
Mitigations: N/A
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS

Page 127
Socio-Economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☐
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: • People who depend more on the bus network for work tend to be lower paid, live in
more deprived areas, and are more likely to turn down jobs due to transport issues,
than those on higher incomes, who tend to use cars and trains more often.
• Income was found to be one of the defining aspects of socio-economic inequality.
Transport costs and affordability are central to the impact of transport on
inequality. If transport is too expensive, then people are not able to make the
journeys they need to get into work or move into education and training that could
improve their prospects.
• Those who depend more on the bus network to participate in the labour market
tend to be lower paid, reside in areas of deprivation, and are more likely to turn
down employment due to transport limitations. It is important to have a reliable,
accessible bus route in this area to connect those on lower income to the city
centre for essential services such as doctors, employment and education.
• Affordability of public transport is one of the key barriers for people living on low
incomes, such as people who are unemployed, in insecure or low paid work, and
people who live in deprived areas.
• Evidence from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation also highlights that residents in
low-income neighbourhood often find commuting options constrained by
unaffordable or unreliable public transport, especially when combined with the
prospect of low-paid or unsecure employment. Low-income jobs such as cleaning,
or security roles may require early starts or late finishes when public transport is
not available. Furthermore, peripheral sites of employment, such as retail,
commercial and industrial parks are hard to access using the public transport
system, making people living in low-income neighbourhoods more reliant on
private transport. Ensuring the bus runs from early in the morning until late in the
evening will ensure those with lower income who rely on this service can access
employment and educational needs.
• Key vehicles for addressing poverty include welfare and public support, education,
cost of living interventions, employment, and social support (e.g. health and social
care services, family relationships (Joseph Rowntree Foundation 2016).
• Access to work is greatly improved by more accessible and affordable public
transport opportunities. Transport is important in obtaining a job, keeping a job, or
getting a better job. Improving provision for cycling can also have a positive impact
on employment opportunities.
• Cycling is regarded as a good way to widen travel horizons for disadvantaged
individuals.
• Support in paying for transport is a way in which cities can support people living in
poverty to access and maintain work.
• Lower income households have higher levels of non-car ownership – female heads
of house, children, younger and some older people, people from a Black, Asian and
minority ethnic background and Disabled people are often concentrated in this
statistic.
• There are geographical inequalities in the provision of transport and as a result
differences in access to employment, healthcare, education, and other amenities
occur. Often these are located in areas that already have good transport links or are
due to have new transport hubs opening nearby. However, residential areas may
have a wider scale of provision compared to areas of employment. The lower level
of car ownership, combined with limited public transport services in many
peripheral social housing estates, exacerbates issues around access to services,
education and employment.
• Evidence suggests that people living in deprived areas face unequal access to
certain modes of transport. Research has found that only a small number of
deprived areas are served by the rail network, instead mostly being accessibly by
Page 128
local buses. Where there are train stations, they are often perceived as rundown
and secluded, leading to feelings of fear about using them.
• People living in deprived neighbourhoods are significantly more likely to feel unsafe
and believe that crime is a significant problem in the areas that they are living.
• A 2018 study into pedestrian safety revealed that children who live in deprived
areas are at a greater risk of being involved in a road related accident (as both a
passenger and a pedestrian) when compared to other children. Children living in
the most deprived quintile are six times as likely to be involved in an accident than
those living in the least deprived quintile. Rates of Killed or Seriously Injured
casualties in relation to miles walked for people in the most deprived quintile is
over double that of those living in the least deprived (0.58 and 0.28 casualties per
million miles walked).
• There is major disparity between people living in deprived areas and communities
in more affluent areas regarding the exposure of individuals to polluted air.
• Increasing promotion and provision of active transport directly benefits people who
reside in deprived areas by improving the local air quality and improving their
health and wellbeing. For example, obesity rates for children are highest amongst
those in deprived areas.
• Public transport has the potential to increase access to employment and education,
in return creating economic prosperity. However, this is based on ensuring that
transport networks connect more deprived areas to centres of employment and
education.
• Ensuring feelings of safety are increased will encourage more people to participate
in active travel modes and use public transport that is available. Safety can be
improved by the provision of quality lighting, clear sightlines and where appropriate
surveillance. Furthermore, concerns around road safety can be reduced through
appropriate education, signs and road markings amongst other things.

Mitigations: • As the scheme prioritises public transport, and lower cost and free modes of
transport (i.e., walking and cycling), the interventions aim to reduce transport
inequality and the impacts of transport poverty on people’s ability to access
employment, education, essential services, and leisure activities.
• Access to work is greatly improved by more accessible transport opportunities.
Transport is important in obtaining a job, keeping a job, or getting a better job.
• Lower income households have higher levels of non-car ownership – female heads
of house, children, younger and some older people, people from a Black, Asian and
minority ethnic background and disabled people are often concentrated in this
statistic. By prioritising active and sustainable transport options, the scheme seeks
to address transport poverty and reduce transport inequalities.
• Increasing promotion and provision of active transport directly benefits people who
reside in deprived areas by improving the local air quality and improving their
health and wellbeing. For example, obesity rates for children are highest amongst
those in deprived areas.
• Through the reduction of vehicle traffic and the prioritisation of local trips being
made by active and sustainable modes, evidence which shows that children who
live in deprived areas are at greater risk of being involved in a road related accident
(as both a passenger and a pedestrian) when compared to other children can be
addressed.
• Rates of Killed or Seriously Injured casualties in relation to miles walked for people
in the most deprived quintile is over double that of those living in the least deprived
(0.58 and 0.28 casualties per million miles walked). By removing the ability for non-
local vehicle traffic to pass through the scheme area, the interventions
implemented should support a reduction in this disparity.
• Schemes such as the £2 price cap on all adult bus tickets are particularly beneficial
for those that are within this group
Page 129as it makes taking the bus more accessible.
Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • Disabled people may find it more difficult by the lack of bus stops so a further
distance to get the bus could make getting the bus more inaccessible.
• As with Age, Disability and Pregnancy and Maternity – policies which aim to change
or limit driving or parking can have a disproportionate impact on people who are
reliant on having their own transport to provide care for someone else.
• Being a carer can be a huge barrier to accessing services and maintaining
employment. Studies show around 65% of adults have provided unpaid care for a
loved one, that women have a 50% likelihood of being an unpaid carer by the age of
46 (by age 57 for men), and that young carers are often hidden and may not
recognise themselves as carers.
• Reduced parking has the potential to impact carers who are visiting clients.
Mitigations: • Bus stops regularly throughout the residential area and community areas.
• General mitigations above regarding socio-economic deprivation are also relevant
to this characteristic.
• A reduction in both parking spaces outside shops and in local centres could affect
access for Disabled people and consequently carers to services, although the
scheme seeks to retain and increase Disabled parking. However, a reduction in
overall parking could affect access for Disabled people and therefore carers, who
are more likely to rely upon a private car to access shops and services. This can have
a knock-on effect on walking distances and the requirement for provision to break
up journeys (seating/resting places). Providing well designed, conveniently located
parking within the immediate zone of influence, is crucial and parking has been
allocated around residential areas and areas where amenities are located. The
changes in the scheme will not restrict anyone’s ability to be dropped off outside of
their property or amenities – there may be increased diversion, but access is not
limited. Disabled organisations were consulted throughout the planning and
development of the designs so that removal/relocation of parking was fully
considered. Further to this, access to amenities and people’s houses was also
discussed, and this influenced the design.

Other groups [Please add additional rows below to detail the impact for any other relevant groups as appropriate e.g.
asylum seekers and refugees; care experienced; homelessness; armed forces personnel and veterans]
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:

3.2 Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their protected or other
relevant characteristics?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our Public Sector Equality Duty to:
✓ Eliminate unlawful discrimination for a protected group
✓ Advance equality of opportunity between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t
✓ Foster good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t

The objectives are focused on creating a more equitable environment and providing a safer, more
accessible and better-quality route, with the infrastructure delivered helping to support improved health
outcomes. Infrastructure proposals will all be required to be in line with latest government guidance
(e.g., LTN 1/20 and Inclusive Mobility) which sets minimum requirements around accessibility to ensure
people using mobility aids, such as walking frames, adapted bikes, or blue badge holders, are not
Page 130
discriminated against because of the environment’s characteristics. Through ongoing engagement,
issues and options to improve the accessibility and safety of scheme areas will be and have been
assessed and developed with input from a range of key stakeholders.

The types of interventions (and their descriptions) that will address issues and provide benefits may
include:

• Improve Bus Priority
o This project will seek to implement a new bus gate on the north end of Park Street, with a
banned left turn coming from Canons Road and a bus lane leading into Park Street from
the South.
o This will reduce traffic levels and allow for buses to pass quicker and more efficiently
through the area, encouraging public transport usage
o Smaller provisions throughout the scheme such as altering existing zebra crossings and
implementing signal infrastructure which prioritises buses.
o Improvement to existing bus stops, notably on Queens Road, with a build out and new
formalised bus stop outside of the University.

Benefits:
- General benefits highlighted above in mitigation sections regarding differing protected
characteristics.

• Make several public realm improvements along the route,
o Reallocation of road space adjacent to Queens Road, creating a new multi-use ‘Plaza’
space, with added trees, planters and seating.
o This will create point closures on Richmond Hill and Park Plaza
o Formalised permanent closure of University Road, implementing public realm area with
trees, Sheffield stands for cycles, planters, and seating.
o Point closure on Berkely Avenue, with public realm scheme, including planters, seating
areas and potential space for businesses to use the space for tables and chairs.
o Park Street Avenue to be closed to motorised vehicles (outside of specific time zones to
allow for loading for businesses). Public realm scheme to be implemented, including
planters, seating, business table and chairs, and cycle parking.
o Widened footways allowing for low-level planters along Park Street, creating the potential
for business tables and chairs.

Benefits:
- General benefits highlighted above in mitigation sections regarding differing protected
characteristics.

• Improve provisions for Active Travel with the implementation of a segregated cycle-way compliant
with LTN 1/20 guidance, with traffic reductions and widened footways along the route improving and
providing safe 8-80 pedestrian and cyclist provision. This includes:
o The introduction of a segregated cycle-way throughout the scheme:
▪ This connects to the Whiteladies Road Flooding Scheme proposed withflow cycle-
way, becoming a two-way segregated cycle-way heading south through the
proposed public-realm scheme ‘Plaza’, with provisions for access to Richmond Hill
and Park Plaza which are now closed to through traffic.

Page 131
This two-way segregated cycle-way continues along the north side of the Triangle,
▪
allowing cyclists a more direct route through the Triangle section, separated from
traffic.
▪ On the eastern side of the Triangle, the cycle-way becomes a segregated withflow
cycleway, with provisions to connect to Park Row developments, and for ease of
access onto Park Street which is now closed to through traffic, reducing traffic and
creating a safer space for cyclists.
▪ Note, parking is now switched to the eastern side of the Park Street from the west,
reducing the risk of ‘car-dooring’ and improving cyclist safety.
o Widened and continuous footways:
▪ Footways are widened throughout the scheme, most notably on and throughout
the length of Park Street, on Queens Road, on Triangle West, and adjacent to the
‘Plaza’ area.
▪ This allows for a safer and more welcoming environment for pedestrians to
navigate.
▪ Continuous footways allow for pedestrians to navigate the footpath and area
more efficiently and safetly, reallocating space away from motorised traffic.

Benefits:
- General highlighted listed above in mitigation sections regarding differing protected
characteristics.

Step 4: Impact

4.1 How has the equality impact assessment informed or changed the proposal?
What are the main conclusions of this assessment? Use this section to provide an overview of your findings. This
summary can be included in decision pathway reports etc.
If you have identified any significant negative impacts which cannot be mitigated, provide a justification showing
how the proposal is proportionate, necessary, and appropriate despite this.
Summary of significant negative impacts and how they can be mitigated or justified:
The EqIA process has helped to identify potential impacts and the need for planned monitoring and
subsequent adjustment of measures in line with feedback from equalities stakeholders and citizens.

The scheme will require the removal or relocation of vehicle parking. In areas where Disabled parking
bays are located and may be subject to change, we will engage with the relevant groups to assess the
impact and develop options which mitigate any negative impact with these groups. However, general
use parking, which may be used by some older people or pregnant people with reduced mobility who
may not have access to disabled parking, must be considered throughout via regular dialogue and
meetings. Disabled organisations were consulted throughout the planning and development of the
designs so that removal/relocation of parking was fully considered. Further to this, access to amenities
and people’s houses was also discussed, and this influenced the design.
Summary of positive impacts / opportunities to promote the Public Sector Equality Duty:
This scheme will look to boost numbers of people using public transport, walking, wheeling and cycling
in some deprived areas of the city, where levels are low compared to the Bristol average. Therefore,
there is an opportunity to gather evidence on how targeted interventions in areas which suffer from
poor health could be replicated across Bristol in the future. The scheme will be:
Page 132
- “Removing or minimising disadvantages suffered by people due to their protected characteristics1”.
- “Taking steps to meet the needs of people from protected groups where these are different from the
needs of other people2”.
- “Encouraging people from protected groups to participate in public life or in other activities where
their participation is disproportionately low3”. 4

4.2 Action Plan
Use this section to set out any actions you have identified to improve data, mitigate issues, or maximise
opportunities etc. If an action is to meet the needs of a particular protected group please specify this.
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale
Public Early Engagement Thor Sever 2020
Public Consultation Thor Sever 2021-2022
Information Exercise Thor Sever 2024
Statutory Consultation Thor Sever 2025

4.3 How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
How will you know if you have been successful? Once the activity has been implemented this equality impact
assessment should be periodically reviewed to make sure your changes have been effective your approach is still
appropriate.

The monitoring and evaluation of schemes post-implementation is crucial for data-led evidence to test their
success against the original objectives. This is known as ‘legacy’ and whilst evidence is gathered on changing travel
behaviours, traffic collisions, air quality improvements etc, evidence is also collected to assess positive and
negative impacts of the interventions on people with protected characteristics.

Evaluation approaches can involve:
• Community surveys: Community surveys carried out in cohorts to capture public feedback and for monitoring
travel behaviour and social impacts.
• Secondary data collation: Collation of information from existing datasets that are collected at regular
intervals to report on progress against objectives.

Evaluating schemes against their objectives can be done using both quantitative and qualitative methods. If, for
example, one objective of a scheme is to ‘Improve residents’ physical and mental health and wellbeing’,
monitoring could be done through community surveys, before and after audits (e.g., Healthy Streets indicators) or
the ‘Quality of Life’ survey. This approach describes a minimum level of monitoring and evaluation to be carried
out for each scheme that is necessary to evidence their success against their intended objectives.

There is a need for flexibility in evaluation approaches given the varying context for projects. Each approach varies
according to existing place-making and travel behaviour, relevant stakeholder groups, community engagement
feedback received from project inception, and differing interventions. The monitoring and evaluation approach
will vary project by project and this could include:

1 Public Sector Equality Duty | Equality and Human Rights Commission (equalityhumanrights.com)
2 Ibid.
3 Ibid.
4 The 2021 Walking and Cycling Index present statistics across Bristol that shows that people in lower socio-

economic groups are less likely to cycle. ‘Socio-economic group is a classification based on occupation maintained by
the Market Research Society. Groups A and B are professional and managerial. Groups D and E are semi-skilled and
unskilled manual occupations, homemakers and people not in employment’. Proportion of residents who cycle at
least once a week: 33% of AB, 26% of C1, 22% of C2, 20% of DE (9% in 2019)4. These statistics highlight that people in
groups A, B and C have higher rates of cycling.
Page 133
• Adaptations to community surveys to capture evaluative feedback on themes identified from the community
engagement within a scheme area (to ensure there is an appropriate feedback loop on issues important to the
local community and which captures a representative evidence base from people with protected
characteristics).
• Widening community surveys within a scheme area to include a broader range of public feedback and/or
include specific stakeholder groups (if there is under-representation from people with protected
characteristics).
• Additional qualitative monitoring, including focus groups with specific stakeholder, disability, or community
groups, or to capture more in-depth evidence from participants of surveys.
• Expanding data collection to include a wider study area if there remains an under-representation of people
with protected characteristics.
• Additional monitoring tools e.g., parking surveys (pedestrians, cyclists, and cars) to understand the varying
groups of people travelling along the route.

Step 5: Review
The Equality and Inclusion Team need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your EqIA. EqIAs
should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers on the equalities
impact of the proposal. Please seek feedback and review from the Equality and Inclusion Team before requesting
sign off from your Director5.
Equality and Inclusion Team Review: Director Sign-Off:
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

Date: 29/10/2024 Date: 31/10/2024

5 Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
Page 134
Environmental Impact Assessment [version 1.0]

Proposal title: Park Street: Exemption and Financial Support package
Project stage and type: ☒ Initial Idea Mandate ☐ Outline Business Case ☐ Full Business Case
☐ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☒ New ☐ Changing
☒ Other [please state] ☐ Already exists / review
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Stephen Pick
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Group Programme Manager

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of this Environmental Impact Assessment is to help you develop your proposal in a way that is
compliant with the council’s policies and supports the council’s strategic objectives under the One City Climate
Strategy, the One City Ecological Emergency Strategy and the latest Corporate Strategy.
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the project proposal process by someone with a good
knowledge of the project, the service area that will deliver it, and sufficient influence over the proposal to make
changes as needed.
It is good practice to take a team approach to completing the Environmental Impact Assessment. See further
guidance on completing this document. Please email environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk early for advice
and feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Please use plain English, avoiding jargon and
acronyms.
The proposal is and addition to the A37/A4018 Strategic Corridor:
Workpackage 3. To seek approval of a time limited exemption
package for qualifying citizens with non-compliant CAZ vehicles and
who live in the area marking blue on the plan, who would be
impacted by the introduction of a Bus Lane and Bus Gate on
Queens Road and Park Street. We will be highlighting the existing
CAZ financial support offers to citizens impacted by the installation
of the Bus Lane and Bus Gate. The exemption would be limited to
one year from the Bus Lane and Bus Gate opening at the Northern
end of Park St and be for qualifying citizens in the area that would
otherwise be forced to drive through the CAZ and incur the charges
or drive through the Bus Lane and Bus Gate.

1.2 Will the proposal have an environmental impact?
Could the proposal have either a positive or negative effects for the environment now or in the future? If ‘No’
explain why you are sure there will be no environmental impact, then skip steps 2-3 and request review by sending
this form to environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk

If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment.
Page 135
☐ Yes ☒ No [please select]

The proposal does not have an environmental impact as the proposal is only for a temporary time limited
exemption of charge through a Bus Gate and Bus Lane from one year from the opening of the Bus Lane and Bus
Gate. There was and EIA completed for the A37/A4018 Strategic Corridor: Workpackage 3. Which will be shared as
an appendix of this committee paper, and it covers the environmental impact of the full scheme.

1.3 If the proposal is part of an options appraisal, has the environmental impact of each option
been assessed and included in the recommendation-making process?
If ‘Yes’ please ensure that the details of the environmental impacts of each option are made clear in the pros and
cons section of the project management options appraisal document.

☐ Yes ☐ No ☒ Not applicable [please select]

If ‘No’ explain why environmental impacts have not been considered as part of the options appraisal process.

Step 2: What kinds of environmental impacts might the project have?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying
potential impacts.

Does the proposal create any benefits for the environment, or have any adverse impacts?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our corporate environmental objectives and the wider One City Climate and Ecological Emergency
strategies.
Consider how the proposal creates environmental impacts in the following categories, both now and in the future.
Reasonable efforts should be made to quantify stated benefit or adverse impacts wherever possible.

Where the proposal is likely to have a beneficial impact, consider what actions would enhance those impacts. Where
the proposal is likely to have a harmful impact, consider whether actions would mitigate these impacts.

Enhancements or mitigation actions are only required when there is a likely impact identified. Remember that where
enhancements or mitigation actions are listed, they should be assigned to staff and appropriately resourced.

GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many categories)

ENV1 Carbon neutral:
Emissions of climate
changing gases
Benefits
BCC has committed to
achieving net zero emissions
for its direct activities by
2025, and to support the city

Page 136
in achieving net zero by
2030.

Will the proposal involve Enhancing
transport, or the use of actions
energy in buildings? Will the
proposal involve the
purchase of goods or
services? If the answer is yes Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
to either of these questions, This proposal should not involve journey detours, so it is not expected
there will be a carbon to impact on vehicle emissions.
impact. Adverse
impacts
Consider the scale and
timeframe of the impact,
particularly if the proposal
will lead to ongoing
emissions beyond the 2025
and 2030 target dates. Mitigating
actions
Further guidance
☒ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

ENV2 Ecological recovery:
Wildlife and habitats
BCC has committed to 30%
Benefits
of its land being managed
for nature and to halve its
use of pesticides by 2030.

Consider how your proposal
can support increased space Enhancing
for nature, reduced use of actions
pesticides, reduce pollution
to waterways, and reduce
consumption of products Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
that undermine ecosystems
around the world.
Adverse
If your proposal will directly impacts
lead to a reduction in habitat
within Bristol, then consider
how your proposed
mitigation can lead to a
biodiversity net gain. Be sure
to refer to quantifiable Mitigating
changes wherever possible. actions

Further guidance
☒ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Page 137
ENV3 A cleaner, low-waste
city: Consumption of Benefits
resources and generation of
waste

Consider what resources will Enhancing
actions
be used as a result of the
proposal, how they can be
minimised or swapped for
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
less impactful ones, where
they will be sourced from,
and what will happen to any
waste generated Adverse
impacts

Mitigating
actions
Further guidance

☒ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

ENV4 Climate resilience:
Bristol’s resilience to the Benefits
effects of climate change

Bristol’s climate is already
changing, and increasingly
frequent instances of
extreme weather will Enhancing
become more likely over actions
time.

Consider how the proposal
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
will perform during periods
of extreme weather
(particularly heat and
Adverse
flooding).
impacts

Consider if the proposal will
reduce or increase risk to
people and assets during
extreme weather events.
Mitigating
actions
Further guidance
☒ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Page 138
Statutory duty: Benefits
Prevention of Pollution to
air, water, or land

Enhancing
actions
Consider how the proposal
will change the likelihood of
pollution occurring to air, Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
water, or land and what This proposal should not involve journey detours, so it is not expected
steps will be taken to to impact on vehicle pollution.
Adverse
prevent pollution occurring. impacts

Mitigating
Further guidance actions

☒ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Step 3: Action Plan
Use this section summarise and assign responsibility for any actions you have identified to improve data, enhance
beneficial, or mitigate negative impacts. Actions identified in section two can be grouped together if named
responsibility is under the same person.
This action plan should be updated at each stage of the project. Please be aware that the Sustainable City and
Climate Change Service may use this action plan as an audit checklist during the project’s implementation or
operation.
Enhancing / mitigating action required Responsible Officer Timescale

Step 4: Review
The Sustainable City and Climate Change Service need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your
impact assessment. Assessments should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for
decision-makers on the environmental impact of the proposal.
Please seek feedback and review by emailing environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk before final submission of
your decision pathway documentation1.

1 Review by the Sustainable City and Climate Change Service confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers
Page
to consider the likely environmental impacts at this stage. 139
This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
Where impacts identified in this assessment are deemed significant, they will be summarised here by the Sustainable
City and Climate Change Service and must be included in the ‘evidence base’ section of the decision pathway cover
sheet.

Summary of significant beneficial impacts and opportunities to support the Climate, Ecological and Corporate
Strategies (ENV1,2,3,4):
The proposal is not expected to have an environmental impact. It gives residents of a specified area who would
have no choice about entering the CAZ if travelling by road time to either, change their travel mode, or purchase a
CAZ-compliant vehicle.

Summary of significant adverse impacts and how they can be mitigated:
As above.

Environmental Performance Team Reviewer: Submitting author:
Giles Liddell, Environmental Performance Co-ordinator Holley Swanwick

Date: Date:
12/09/2025 12/09/2025

Page 140
Agenda Item 10

Committee Report

KEY DECISION OR FOR INFORMATION: Key decision affects 2 or more wards

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 23 October 2025

TITLE: Cycle Hangar Policy

Ward(s): Citywide

Officer presenting the report: Adam Crowther Job title: Head of City Transport

Committee Chair: Councillor Ed Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: Committee Chair

Purpose of Report:

1. To seek approval to enact a target policy, outlined further in the Cycle Hangar Policy
Paper, for the delivery of new cycle hangars up to 2030, and to adopt the proposed position
therein.
2. To seek delegated approval for the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration in
consultation with the Transport and Connectivity Committee Chair and Section 151 Officer
to bid for, accept and commit to any funding in support of the policy up to a total estimated
combined value of £4 million.

Introduction

Bristol City Council would like everyone to have the option to access safe and secure cycle
storage, as part of supporting active and sustainable travel in the city. Bike theft is prevalent in
Bristol, and hangars offer a solution to the key cycling barrier of lacking a secure and
accessible storage location, or any suitable storage at all. With over 500 locations previously
requested in 2023, and 90% of newly installed hangar spaces booked out within two hours of
availability, cycle hangars continue to demonstrate a consistent demand.

A cycle hangar policy aims to make setting off by bike as easy and accessible as by car. By
establishing a minimum target for installations, and the types of areas that are most in need of
secure on-street storage, future funding can be directed towards this essential goal.

The Transport and Connectivity Committee recently approved Active Travel Fund Tranches 5
and 6, setting aside just under £200,000 for the delivery of future cycle hangars, and the policy
will draw from this for the next round of installations. Beyond this, funding is not currently
identified for additional delivery of hangars. As such, the Cycle Hangar Policy seeks delegated

Template approved March 25
Page 141
OFFICIAL
approval to bid for and accept any future funding from various sources outlined
below to enact the policy up to 2030.

Proposed Positions

To make the use and availability of cycle hangars and storage as accessible as possible, the
following positions are proposed:
a. At least 400 additional hangars by 2030, atop of 102 existing, inclusive of those
planned for installation as part of other City Transport projects.
b. Priority delivery for social housing and areas experiencing higher deprivation, but
especially neighbourhood areas with high household occupancy of Terraced, Flat,
Shared, Converted or Commercial property types.
c. Delivery team to review and develop approach for supporting street parking and
specialised hangar provision for those with adapted bikes, cargo bikes and bike
trailers.
d. Accelerated request response, available to make via
www.bristol.gov.uk/cyclehangars.

Evidence Base

1. Please see Appendix A1, Cycle Hangar Policy Paper, for detailed evidence base.
2. Safe cycle storage has been seen to increase bike ownership by 24%, and 94% of users
find cycle hangars both secure and easy to use, increasing trips by 1.44 on average per
week.
3. People living in census-designated Terraced, Flat, Shared, Converted or Commercial
housing often have the most difficulties with storing bikes, and show a high tendency in
2023 requests, but some areas with many residents in these accommodation types are
underrepresented (Appendix A2). As such, targeted delivery will help to provide hangars
where they are needed most.
4. Further analysis to explore intersection with social housing, deprivation and
accommodation will be undertaken when deciding on targeted delivery locations.

Alternative options considered:

1. No new cycle hangars – not recommended due to evident latent demand and requirement
for enabling new cycling journeys. No extra cost, but poor ongoing provision.
2. Limited, local rollouts – not recommended due to city-wide relevance of lack of secure
cycle parking. Whilst more concentrated in the centre, all wards have at least some areas
with many residents living in Terraced, Flat, Shared, Converted or Commercial
accommodation. Newer developments are the exception, often building in cycle storage as
standard, and so will not be a principal target of the policy.
3. Incorporate other cycle parking features into the policy – not pursued due to the upcoming
delivery of Bristol’s Kerbside Strategy, which will detail in the round proposals for
reallocation of kerb space for sustainable transport and other uses, including cycle stands.
Funding, Costs and Administration
Template approved March 25
Page 142
OFFICIAL
Funding and Costs

1. Various pots of funding are expected to be available, including the upcoming Transport City
Region (TCR) fund, future tranches of Active Travel England (ATE) funding, CIL funding,
developer contributions (Section 106), and EU funding streams. Historically, the West of
England Combined Authority (WECA) has attained funding through central government for
schemes such as the West of England Cycle Hangar Project. The Combined Authority
currently hold a scheme promotion and grant assurance role in cycle hangar delivery, and
we will continue to work with WECA to ensure correct governance is in place to deliver
BCC’s cycle hangar target.
2. Based on a full breakdown of the previous round of cycle hangar delivery in Bristol, it is
estimated to cost today £383,460 to deliver 40 cycle hangars. When incorporating this
figure to installing the 400 cycle hangars in line with this policy, it totals £3,834,600.
Including a 4.25% inflation rate, the overall cost is expected to reach £3,997,570, but
changes in management and administration, as well as potential economies of scale with
future delivery, could affect the final figure.

Administration

3. The current cycle hangar contract for Bristol City Council is held by Lock-it-Safe, expiring
towards the end of 2026 but able to be extended for a further two years. A £55 yearly user
fee covers both normal operating maintenance and administration costs, with no Council
contribution. Quarterly reports are given to the Council on the condition of hangars. £10 per
user is held in a dedicated account, with access only for Bristol City Council, for reactive
maintenance not covered by warranty. The approach to administration is not expected to
change with the continuation of the present contract.
4. There are presently no plans to change cycle hangar contract – if this were to be altered
due to, e.g., continued expansion of hangar stock, a hangar maintenance approach would
be developed within City Transport that would not burden Council budgets. Either bidding
would ensure that a pot of funds is held for hangar upkeep and repair, or user fees would
cover this as per the current contract.
5. The relevant City Transport team responsible for future administration and delivery will be
undertaking a review of the contracts and management process to account for the
additional hangars required, and to determine the best approach going forward. This could
include a benchmarking assessment of how other Authorities approach prioritisation of
space allocation.
6. As with any scheme that proposes reallocation of the public highway from parking, there
may be budgetary considerations regarding parking revenue. This is actively under
consideration in the development of the Transport Investment Strategy, which will look
holistically to balance the meeting of health, emissions and environmental targets with
budgetary concerns.
Officer Recommendations:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity:
Template approved March 25
Page 143
OFFICIAL
1. Approves the approach to future delivery and 2030 installation target set out
in the attached Cycle Hangar Policy Paper.
2. Authorises the Executive Director of Growth and Regeneration, in consultation with the
Chair of the Transport and Connectivity Committee, to procure and award any future cycle
hangar contracts in line with the maximum combined budget envelope outlined in this
report.

Corporate Strategy alignment:

1. New secure cycle parking is aligned with the Council’s commitment to enable cycling in the
city. To reach the One City target of carbon neutrality by 2030, vehicle mileage must be
reduced by 40%, and sustainable transport methods such as cycling increased. Residents
frequently raise the lack of simple and accessible storage as restricting their ability to cycle,
or to own a bike, an issue that this this policy aims to address.
2. An ambitious cycle hangar policy aligns with the Corporate Strategy‘s Vision, to drive an
inclusive, sustainable, and healthy city by encouraging active travel uptake.
3. It also aligns with its Transport and Connectivity theme which aims to develop a more
efficient, sustainable, and inclusive connection of people to people, people to jobs and
people to opportunity, making it safer and easier to use cycleways and pavements,
regardless of ability.
4. Finally, it aligns with the Environment and Sustainability theme, which aims to decarbonise
the city, by improving active travel infrastructure and reducing reliance on private vehicles.

City Benefits:

1. The government guidance document LTN 1/20 emphasises that cycle parking is “integral to
any cycle network”. The “availability of secure cycle parking” throughout a cyclist’s journey
“has a significant influence on cycle use”.
2. Bristol’s 2023 Quality of Life Survey found a 7% gap between the most deprived decile and
the city average for people cycling at least once a week (reducing to 4.6% in the 2024
survey). As a key barrier to cycling, a lack of safe storage in areas of high deprivation must
be addressed as a matter of equality. Protected groups such as Disabled or older people
are often excluded from cycling when storage would involve lifting over steps, up sets of
stairs, or awkward movements down narrow corridors. A cycle hangar policy aims to make
setting off by bike as easy and accessible as by car.
3. A city which is more active is one that is cleaner, more equitable and better connected. Its
citizens are less lonely due to barriers to independent travel being removed and have the
mental and physical health benefits of regular exercise. With an improved active travel
offer, those without the means to drive are nonetheless able to benefit from a modern, safe
transport network.
4. With fewer people driving for short journeys, air quality improves, and general emissions
decrease. In the long-term, the overall energy usage per capita of the Bristol transport
network will be much lower with greater active travel uptake, and overall emissions of
greenhouse gases will decrease.

Template approved March 25
Page 144
OFFICIAL
5. When implemented alongside other key changes to infrastructure in the city, a
cycle hangar policy will enable more people to choose to travel by bike, and
bring a host of benefits for health, sociability, sustainability and equality.

Consultation Details:

1. The Cycle Hangar Policy has been arrived upon by consulting with relevant disciplines
within City Transport, and learning from previous iterations of cycle hangar delivery.
2. Consultation will include standard engagement questions for targeted monitoring of uptake
in cycling journeys, with a focus on understanding the extent to which car journeys are
shifted to cycling in areas which receive cycle hangers.
3. In line with the approach taken with previous rounds of cycle hangar delivery, consultation
will occur in the form of a city-wide (and Combined Authority-wide should funding be
received at this level) wave of resident requests, which will then be sifted for appropriate
sites for delivery. Requests can also may made via www.bristol.gov.uk/cyclehangars.
4. Informal consultation with residents at the street level, including letter drops, will determine
the most suitable site for installation. This will be especially important in later delivery
waves, where a mix of targeted and request-based delivery is planned, especially for areas
above a certain threshold of households with Terraced, Flat, Shared, Converted or
Commercial properties.
5. Bristol City Council will meet any legal requirements necessary, including consultation, as
dependent on site of installation.

Background Documents:

a. Sustrans, 2023. Bristol Walking and Cycling Index 2023.
Walking and Cycling Index 2023: Bristol
b. Sustrans, 2024. Bristol Cycle Hangars Evaluation Report.
c. Department for Transport, 2020. Local Transport Note 1/20.
Cycle Infrastructure Design: LTN 1/20
d. Lambeth Council, 2024. Lambeth’s Kerbside Strategy.
Lambeth's Kerbside Strategy
References:
1. Department for Transport, 2020. Local Transport Note 1/20. p. 132. 11.1.2. Cycle parking
and other equipment.
assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5ffa1f96d3bf7f65d9e35825/cycle-infrastructure-
design-ltn-1-20.pdf
2. Bristol City Council, 2024. Quality of Life Survey. % Who cycle at least once a week.
https://app.powerbi.com/view?r=[REDACTED_POWERBI_REPORT_ID]
MWEzY2IxIiwidCI6IjYzNzhhN2E1LTBmMjEtNDQ4Mi1hZWUwLTg5N2ViN2RlMzMxZiJ9
3. Bristol City Council, 2025. Quality of Life Survey. % Who cycle at least once a week.
https://app.powerbi.com/view?r=[REDACTED_POWERBI_REPORT_ID]
zVlMmZkODVhIiwidCI6IjYzNzhhN2E1LTBmMjEtNDQ4Mi1hZWUwLTg5N2ViN2RlMzMxZiJ
9

Template approved March 25
Page 145
OFFICIAL
Revenue Covered by Source of Revenue Presently covered by supplier,
Cost Lock-it-Safe user Funding Lock-it-Safe. Management
fee; £10 reserved contract and administration to be
per user per year reviewed by Citywide Initiatives
for reactive team.
maintenance
Capital Cost No direct cost to Source of Capital TCR, ATE Funding, CIL,
deliver policy; Funding Developer Contributions
400 hangars est. (Section 106), EU Funding
~£4 million based Streams
on 2025 delivery.
One off cost ☒ Ongoing Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving?
cost ☐ N/A
OR Income generation proposal ☐

Professional comments section:

1. Finance Advice: This report is requesting the approval of a target policy for the delivery of
new cycle hangars up to 2030. Within the report, the target set is for 400 new hangars at an
estimated cost of £4 million and it is requested that delegation be given to the Executive
Director of Growth & Regeneration, in consultation with the Committee Chair and Section
151 Officer, to spend this amount.

Finance has been provided with a high-level breakdown of the cost of delivery of 40 hangars
based on previous spend. The cost has been estimated at £348,600 plus a 10% contingency
and 4.25% inflation, to give £399,757, which forms the basis of the £4 million estimate for
delivery of 400 hangars. This estimate appears reasonable at this stage.

The team has identified several potential funding sources for delivery of the hangars,
however at this stage there is not a detailed funding plan. Future decisions will be taken in
consultation with the Section 151 Officer, and any spend agreed will be backed by a robust
funding plan. The grant bid protocol will be followed for any funding applications in relation
to delivery of this policy.

Finance Business Partner: Ben Hegarty, Finance Business Partner Growth and
Regeneration, 6 August 2025.

2. Legal Advice: The submission of bids for grant funding raises no particular legal issues. If
successful, the procurement process must be conducted in line with the Procurement Act
2023 and the Councils own procurement rules. Legal services will advise and assist officers
with regard to the conduct of the procurement process and the resulting contractual
arrangements.

A Traffic Regulation Order (“TRO”) will need to be the subject of a statutory public
consultation exercise which will require the consultation to be undertaken at a time when the
proposals can be influenced and changed in response to any feedback / objections received
as a result of the consultation. Any consultation responses must be taken into account by
the decision maker before the TRO is confirmed.
Template approved March 25
Page 146
OFFICIAL
Legal Team Leaders: Husinara Jones and Joanne Mansfield, Team
Managers/Solicitors 25th and 28th July 2025

3. Implications on IT: I cannot see any implications on IT regarding this activity.

IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead Enterprise Architect – 31 July 2025

4. HR Advice: There are no HR implications evident.

HR Partner: Celia Williams, HR Business Partner, 28 July 2025

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal YES

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) YES

Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment NO

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

Template approved March 25
Page 147
OFFICIAL
Bristol Council City Transport

Cycle Hangar Policy

Appendix A1 – Cycle Hangar Policy Paper

October 2025

Policy Aim: To make on-street secure bike storage as accessible as possible for
those who need it.
To achieve this, the following is proposed:
a. At least 400 additional hangars by 2030, atop of 102 existing, inclusive of those
planned for installation as part of other City Transport projects.
b. Priority delivery for social housing and areas experiencing higher deprivation, but
especially neighbourhood areas with high household occupancy of Terraced, Flat,
Shared, Converted or Commercial property types.
c. Delivery team to review and develop approach for supporting street parking and
specialised hangar provision for those with adapted bikes, cargo bikes and bike
trailers.
d. Accelerated request response, available to make via
www.bristol.gov.uk/cyclehangars.

Figure 1. Bristol Cycle Hangar (Source: BBC News [1])

Page 148
OFFICIAL
Summary
Modal shift is individual and multifaceted; bike rides begin much earlier than the first
interaction with a cycle route. An ambitious cycle hangar target policy will support the first
and last minute of cycle journeys in Bristol.
Parking a bike inside brings in dirt, causes clutter and reduces living space. Bristol
terraced housing frequently lacks garden access, creating inconvenience and mess even
if opting for outdoor garden storage. Landlords or letting agencies may not permit internal
storage at all; a higher-than-average Bristol renting rate of 45.2% against 37.5% for
England and Wales [2] making this yet more pressing. Flats, Shared Occupancy,
Converted or Commercial properties also each have their own challenges for internal
bicycle storage
Whether stored in the garden, attached to the wall or kept in the hallway, not to mention
navigating stairs or lifts for flat occupants, the extra effort needed to move a bike to the
road in these property types ensures that access to the public highway is almost always
easier for those choosing to drive. For some disabled people that use bikes (including as
mobility aids) and with the increasing popularity, but increased weight, of e-bikes, these
forms of cycle parking may be especially challenging. This becomes especially important
for shorter trips just outside of walking range, where even a minor inconvenience can be
significant for journey time, and lead people to opt for the car.

Key Statistics
• The 2023 West of England Cycle Hangar Project (WECHP) consultation received 541
requests.
• 90% of WECHP spaces were booked out within 2 hours [1], proving demand.
• The Sustrans Walking and Cycling Index 2023 [3] notes that there was one reported
theft for every 167 bicycle owners in Bristol (1,463 reported thefts in 2022/2023). The
necessity of outdoor storage due to limited parking options is a contributing factor.
• Safe cycle storage has been seen to increase bike ownership by 24%, and 94% of
users find cycle hangars both secure and easy to use, increasing trips by 1.44 on
average per week [4].
• Recommendation 9 of the 2021 Bristol Citizen’s Assembly Report, which includes
transferring 3-5% of street car parking spaces over to cycle parking and shared green
space a year, received a combined 89% Strongly Support or Support [5].

Mapping and Analysis

• Figure 2 (also seen in Appendix A2) shows a map of 2023 cycle hangar requests
against accommodation type, i.e. proportion of residents occupying Terraced, Flat,
Shared, Converted or Commercial properties (T/FSCC) in each Lower Layer Super
Output Area in Bristol. There is a clear tendency for requests to cluster around these

Page 149
OFFICIAL
housing types. Existing House in Multiple Occupation (HMO) Licence density is also
overlayed, and shows a similar but not exclusive tendency. Maps splitting into
specifically Flats, Shared, Converted and Commercial (FSCC) and Terraced (T) can
also be seen in Appendices A4-5. This distinction is important to make, as needs of
the one category are not always directly translated to the other.
• Whilst HMOs have been displayed as an indicative contributor to hangar demand,
future HMO licences will require secure cycle storage as standard, reducing this
factor’s salience for targeted delivery. As such they have not been included as a
priority area in the policy.

Figure 2. Map showing select Census 2021 accommodation (T/FSCC) overlayed with WECHP
requests and areas within the highest quintile (20%) of HMO density. (Source: ONS [6];
Internal)
• Important, too, is the distinction between renting and home-owning households.
Homeowners are often able to implement custom solutions for storing bikes, whereas
those renting will likely not have this freedom.

Page 150
OFFICIAL
• It can also be seen that there are large areas of T/FSCC accommodation types where
requests were not received, showing latent demand that may not be met on a
request-basis alone.
• As such, a statistical test was undertaken to investigated further. The test used, a
‘Generalised Linear Regression’, can be employed to understand the relationship
between one main variable, hangar requests in this instance, and one or more other
factors such as accommodation. A map can be found in Appendix A3 that presents
the difference, or ‘deviation’ from what requests may have been expected based upon
accommodation data. This provides a clearer depiction of areas with high occupancy
in Terraced, Flat, Shared, Converted or Commercial properties, yet without many
2023 requests.
• These dark purple areas show that potential demand is highly concentrated in some
under-requested parts of the city centre, but also extends outside of the central ring
where previous requests were largely clustered. Areas area also shown in dark green
where requests were greater than expected by the test, and whilst data is imperfect
due to many zero-values, these potentially indicate where the largest vocal demand
may continue to be found.
• These maps are not intended to directly denote future hangar locations, and more
detailed analysis will be done at later stages of targeted delivery. For example, factors
such as central blocks of flats potentially incorporating cycle storage have not been
included, but could partially explain lack of requests. For the same reason, newer
developments will not be a principle target of the policy.
• Social housing, a priority category for delivery of new hangars, has not been included
within indicative mapping, so will also require more detailed analysis to show how
demand and latent demand intersect. Council rented flats, due to accommodation
type and social factors, may prove of greater priority – multiple factor analysis will
enable these interactions to be considered in prioritisation.

Aspirational, but Achievable
Other authorities, in London especially, but also Glasgow as a key example, are rapidly
increasing cycle hangar availability to keep up with demand. With Bristol’s Victorian
terraced streets, and high numbers of flats and other associated housing types, similar
ambition should be set here. A detailed local authority comparison of hangar delivery
targets and current availability can be found in Appendix A6.

Bristol is, of course, not London. Whereas terraced streets and flats are mutual, Bristol’s
more car-dependent transport network and comparative funding constraints present
obstacles. A proposed delivery of 400 additional hangars will be achieved through a
ramp-up over the years preceding 2030. An indicative representation may be found
above in Figure 4. This assumes a high demand scenario, where cycling mode share

Page 151
OFFICIAL
targets are being met, and increased accessibility of the cycle network has led to a yet
more pressing need for hangars.

Cycle Hangars Past Delivery and Indicative
Projection (2032 High Demand Scenario)
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
5 02 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20
01 2 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32
-2 -2
Pr e 20
15

Figure 3. Cycle hangar delivery past and projected

This aspirational but achievable target, aiming initially for a ratio of one hangar / 1000
Bristol residents, will not necessarily be evenly distributed, and actual availability for
populations in T/FSCC housing (67% of households [6]) will be higher. Later phases of
delivery will be guided by a mix of targeted and request-based installation. Mapping
exercises such as those seen in the Appendix help to denote where this future hangar
provision could be focused, but the approach will ultimately be decided by the
appropriate delivery team.

Conclusion

With a range of funding options available, expertise in delivery and a pressing need for
on-street parking demand evident, cycle hangars can and will be delivered in increasing
numbers over the next five years. Residents currently limited by the security of on-street
parking will have this barrier overcome through access to a hangar, with the option to
cycle unlocked for more people than ever.

Whilst not the focus of this paper, short-stay on-street storage options are also up for
consideration, with solutions currently forthcoming that charge a small, market-
competitive fee by the minute to park a bike, just as on-street car parking meters charge
by the minute for cars.

By 2030, with an anticipated wider availability of both home and destination storage,
parking a bicycle in Bristol will soon provide the same peace of mind as the private car,
with all its modern security features. The threat of cycle theft will diminish as the key
barrier to entry that it currently is, enabling Bristol to continue to work towards its
aspiration of a safe, accessible, healthy and sustainable transport network.

Page 152
OFFICIAL
References

1. BBC, 2025. ‘Bristol bike storage hangars almost fully booked in 90 minutes’.
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cp9ym3xnel2o
2. Bristol City Council, 2025. Bristol Census Data Profiles. Tenure Area Profile.
https://app.powerbi.com/view?r=[REDACTED_POWERBI_REPORT_ID]
2U5NWQ0Y2FlIiwidCI6IjYzNzhhN2E1LTBmMjEtNDQ4Mi1hZWUwLTg5N2ViN2RlMz
MxZiJ9
3. Sustrans, 2023. Bristol Walking and Cycling Index. p. 17. Reported cycle thefts.
https://www.sustrans.org.uk/media/13264/bristol-walking-and-cycling-index-2023.pdf
4. Sustrans, 2024. Bristol Cycle Hangars Evaluation Report. p.4. Executive Summary.
5. Bristol City Council, 2021. Report from Bristol’s Citizen’s Assembly. p.44.
Recommendation 9.
https://democracy.bristol.gov.uk/documents/s61518/BCA%20Report_V3_FINAL.pdf
6. Office for National Statistics, 2023. 2021 Census. Accommodation type (TS044).
https://www.nomisweb.co.uk/query/construct/summary.asp?mode=construct&version
=0&dataset=2062

Bristol Council

City Transport

October 2025

Page 153
OFFICIAL
Appendix A2 - Map Showing Requests/ T/FSCC Housing/ HMO Licenses

Page 154
OFFICIAL
Appendix A3 - Map Showing Requests/ Generalised Linear Regression Deviance
Residual (Predicted figure is based upon housing type)

Page 155
OFFICIAL
Appendix A4 – Map Showing Requests/ Terraced Housing/ HMO Licenses

Page 156
OFFICIAL
Appendix A5 - Map Showing Requests/ FSCC Housing/ HMO Licenses

Page 157
OFFICIAL
Appendix A6 – Case Studies and Local Authority Comparison

Comparison Chart

Hangars Compared - UK Authorities
Hangars Per 100,000 Projected Hangars Projected Per 100,000

1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
n) n) 7) 6) 6) 03
)
26
)
02
) *)
io io 02 (2 02 0 6 30
oj ct (2 02 (2 (2 (2 0 (2 20
ec t je l(
pr pr o Fu rg h ge
y ow th kney to
lh bu sg mbe Br
(No (N
o am in ar in la ac is
Ed H G La H
fie
ld on an d
ht
ef ig ith
Sh Br sm
er
m
am
H

Figure A6-1. Comparison of future hangar delivery (Sources: Various, found below)

Case Studies

Sheffield 7 hangars, 4/100k [a]
Projected: n/a
• “Currently, there are 7 cycle hangars located across Crookes and Walkley with
another due to be installed soon. The Council has ambitions to add an extra 14
hangars across the city in the spring [2025], paid for by funding generated from
the Clean Air Zone.”

Brighton 150 hangars, 51/100k [b, c]
Projected: n/a
• “More secure on-street cycle parking at homes and destinations.”
• “Extremely popular since installation began in the summer of 2022. More than
95% of spaces have been allocated to residents and over 2000 people are on a
waiting list.”

Hammersmith and Fulham 9 hangars, 5/100k [d]
Projected 2027: 500, 270/100k
• “A three-year programme to increase the amount of secure cycle storage for
residents. […] 3,000 new parking spots by 2027 – one for every resident on the
current waiting list.”

Edinburgh 180 hangars, 35/100k [e, f]

Page 158
OFFICIAL
Projected 2026: 380, 73/100k
• “Continue rollout of secure cycle hangars, with an increased emphasis on delivery
in more deprived areas.”

Haringey 379 hangars, 129/100k [g, h]
Projected 2026: 500, 170/100k
• “The latest batch will bring the total number of cycle spaces to almost 1,800 as the
council closes in on its target of 2,000 plus by the end of 2024/25.”

Glasgow 205 hangars, 32/100k [i]
Projected 2030: 705, 111/100k
• “120 units will be installed per year for the first three years of the contract with the
remainder brought in over the final two years. New locations will be determined by
a number of factors - requests and demand, the Scottish Index of Multiple
Deprivation, type of architecture and proximity to existing or planned cycle routes.”

Lambeth 615 hangars, 194/100k [j, k]
Projected 2026: 723, 111/100k
• “At a minimum, secure cycle parking is provided every 100 metres on every street
in Lambeth”
• “Cycle parking spaces are always cheaper than all residential parking permits”

Hackney 1251 hangars, 475/100k [l, m]
Projected 2026: 1675, 596/100k
• “Expand provision of secure on street cycle parking in the form of hangars to make
it accessible to most households over the lifetime of the plan”
• “Continue to work with Hackney Homes and other housing associations and
Registered Social Landlords (RSLs) to help provide secure residential cycle
parking to residents that live on estates”

Page 159
OFFICIAL
Case Study References

a. Sheffield City Council, 2024. Cycle hangars to be rolled out across Sheffield, but
we need your help | Sheffield City Council
b. Brighton and Hove Council. 2021. Developing a new transport plan for Brighton
and Hove. p. 36. https://www.brighton-hove.gov.uk/sites/default/files/2021-
09/7156%20Local%20Transport%20Plan%20consultation%20WEB.pdf
c. Brighton and Hove Council. 2021. https://www.brighton-
hove.gov.uk/news/2024/rollout-150-residents-cycle-hangars-now-complete
d. Hammersmith and Fulham Council, 2024. 500 new bike hangars being installed in
H&F | London Borough of Hammersmith & Fulham
e. Edinburgh City Council, 2023. Active Travel Action Plan 2023 – Delivering the City
Mobility Plan. Supporting and encouraging people to walk, wheel and cycle.
https://democracy.edinburgh.gov.uk/documents/s53899/7.3%20-
%20Active%20Travel%20Action%20Plan%20Committee%20report%20with%20a
ppendices.pdf
f. Edinburgh City Council, 2025. https://www.edinburgh.gov.uk/cycling-walking/cycle-
parking/
g. Haringey Council, 2025. On street Cycle Parking (storage) Locations - Haringey -
Google My Maps
h. Haringey Council, 2024. Racing ahead with roll-out of cycle hangars | Haringey
Council
i. Glasgow City Council, 2024. Cycle Storage Scheme Set For Significant Expansion
- Glasgow City Council
j. Lambeth Council, 2025. Cycle Parking. On street cycle hangars – for residential
use. https://www.lambeth.gov.uk/streets-roads-transport/cycling-walking/cycle-
parking/street-cycle-hangars-residential-use
k. Lambeth Council, 2024. Lambeth’s Kerbside Strategy. p. 20. Priority One – Enable
accessible and active travel.
https://moderngov.lambeth.gov.uk/documents/s143755/Appendix%20A%20-
%20Lambeths%20Kerbside%20Strategy.pdf
l. Hackney Council, 2025. Cycle hangars | Hackney Council
m. Hackney Council, 2022. Hackney Council Transport Strategy: Cycling Plan.
https://hackney.gov.uk/transport-strategy

Page 160
OFFICIAL
Equality Impact Assessment [version 3.1]

Refer to EqIA Step by Step Guide for advice on completing this assessment
Title: Cycle Hangar Policy
Type of proposal: Policy Status: New
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Anthony Davies
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Transport Strategy Officer

Step 1: What do we want to do?

What is the purpose of the proposal?
Bristol City Council would like everyone to have the option to access safe and secure cycle storage, as
part of supporting active and sustainable travel in the city. Bike theft is prevalent in Bristol , and cycle
hangars offer a solution to the key cycling barrier of lacking a secure and accessible storage location, or
any suitable storage at all.

Cycle hangars (pictured below) offer fixed on-street, secure cycle parking for up to 6 bikes which can
only be accessed by lock and key or on an app in some locations. They are about the size of one parking
space and are for an area’s local residents.

Page 161
60,000 homes, 32% of Bristol’s housing stock, are Victorian terraced housing with narrow hallways and
often no garden access. Despite bumper-to-bumper parking on these residential streets, for the driver it
is as straightforward as a key in the ignition and a few careful turns of the wheel to set off. Leaving aside
other preparations that contribute to the relative inconvenience of cycling, a cycle hangar policy aims to
tackle two key equivalents in the parking and departure process, especially in older dwellings or flats:

• Parking a bike inside brings in dirt, causes clutter and reduces living space. Bristol terraced
housing frequently lacks garden access, creating inconvenience and mess even if opting for
outdoor garden storage. Landlords often may not permit internal storage at all.
• Whether stored in the garden, attached to the wall or kept in the hallway, not to mention
navigating stairs or lifts for flat occupants, the extra effort needed to move a bike to the road
ensures that access to the public highway is consistently far easier for the driver than the cyclist.

Modal shift is individual and multifaceted; cycle journeys begin much earlier than the first interaction
with a segregated cycle route.

Proposed position:
• One cycle hangar per 1000 residents by 2030 – i.e. one secure cycle space for every 166 residents
• ~70% on-street, ~30% social housing/ areas with high levels of deprivation (refined with further
work)
• Accelerated request process for residents, aspiring to 12 months from application acceptance
• Commit to supporting people with adapted bikes, cargo bikes and bike trailers by
accommodating these requests on a case-by-case basis, including guidance and assistance for
bespoke storage

Process to determine location of hangars to be arranged by appropriate delivery teams

\Who will be affected?
☐ Bristol City Council workforce ☐ Service users ☐ The wider community
☐ Commissioned services ☐ City partners / Stakeholder organisations

Will the proposal have an equality impact?
☒ Yes ☐ No
If ‘Yes’ complete steps 2-4 below. If ‘No’ explain how you know there will be no equality impact:

Step 2: What information do we have? [complete if ‘Yes’ to an equality impact]

What data or evidence is there about who could be affected?

Data / Summary of what this tells us
Evidence
Source
[Include a
reference
where known]
Travel to Understanding work travel habits will highlight the co-factors that influence equality issues in this
Work proposal as understanding how many people are using bikes to travel to work will determine the
Census 2021 level of impact on Bristol’s commuters and those with Protected Characteristics.
Page 162
Bristol:
38.6% working from home, 33.1% driving a car or van, 11.2% on foot, 6.1% bus, minibus or coach,
5.25% bicycle, 3.1% passenger in a car or van.

Transport Indicator Bristol Bristol
Quality of average average
Life Survey, 2023/24 2024/25
2023/24; % who cycle at least once a week 24.6% 24.3%
2024/25)

% who cycle to work 15.9% 15.4%

% who drive to work 36.7% 34.4%

% who take the bus to work 13.2% 14.1%

% who walk or cycle to work 34.5% 35.5%

% who walk or wheel to work 18.6% 20.2%

% who think traffic congestion is a problem locally 74.0% 82.9%

Of the % of people who walk or wheel to work:

Quality of Life 2024-25 % who walk or
Indicator: wheel to work
Group Percentage
Bristol Average 20.2
10% most deprived 11.7
16 to 24 years 37.4
50 years and older 14.3
Disabled 16.8
Asian/Asian British 20.1
Black/Black British 15.1
Mixed/Multiple ethnic groups 15.2
Black, Asian and Minority
Ethnic 18.6
White Minority Ethnic 24.4
White British 19.9
Female 21.7
Male 18.7
LGB+ 28.2
Trans 35.8
Christian 14.0
Muslim 18.6
Other religion 18.3
No religion or faith 20.6
Page 163
Rented from housing
association 20.7
Rented from private landlord 32.9
Rented from the council 13.7
All carers 16.2
Single parents 16.3
No qualifications 9.4

Car Indicator Bristol average
availability
Census 2021
% households with no car or van 26.2%

% households with 1 car or van 45.8%

% households with 2 cars or vans 21.6%

% households with 3 cars or vans 6.4%

Health and Indicator Bristol average Bristol average
Wellbeing 2023/24 2024/25
Quality of % above average mental wellbeing 8.9% 7.4%
Life Survey
(2023/24;
2024/25)
% in good health 83.6% 81.7%

% overweight or obese 47.2% 47.7%

Age
Microsoft
Power BI

Age: Young Indicator 16-24 Bristol Difference
People years average
Quality of Cycle at least once a week 22.1% 24.3% Broadly
Life Survey similar
Page 164
(2023/24; Cycle to work 12.1% 15.4% Broadly
2024/25) similar
Walk or cycle to work 49.5% 35.5% Significantly
higher
For whom lack of transport options (2023/24 data as 35.5% 22.4% Significantly
last time question was asked) prevents them from higher
leaving their home when they want to.
Drive to work 19.1% 34.4% Significantly
lower
Can travel to local shops or services by car 24.8% 40.4% Significantly
lower
Age: Older Indicator 65 Bristol Difference
People years+ average
Quality of Cycle at least once a week 8.3% 24.3% Significantly
Life Survey lower
2024/25 Cycle to work 9.3% 15.4% Significantly
lower
Walk or cycle to work 16.1% 35.5% Significantly
lower
For whom lack of transport options (2023/24 data as 22.3% 22.4% Broadly
last time question was asked) prevents them from similar
leaving their home when they want to.
Drive to work 28.3% 34.4% Significantly
lower
Can travel to local shops or services by car 50.8% 40.4% Significantly
higher

Age UK: The
Driving remains the most common form of transport for older people in the UK, with 68%
Future of
of households where someone is aged 70+ having their own car.
Transport in
an Ageing
Society, 2015
Disability Indicator Bristol average
Census 2021 % households with at least one person with health 32.2%
issues or disability that affects day-to-day activities

Quality of Indicator Disabled Bristol Difference
Life Survey average
2024/25 Cycle at least once a week 12.3% 24.3% Significantly
lower
Cycle to work 11.2% 15.4% Significantly
lower
Walk or cycle to work 27.9% 35.5% Significantly
lower
For whom lack of transport options (2023/24 data as 33.1% 22.4% Significantly
last time question was asked) prevents them from higher
leaving their home when they want to.
Drive to work 27.4% 34.4% Significantly
lower
Can travel to local shops or services by car 33% 40.4% Significantly
lower

The percentage of people in Bristol who are Disabled and who cycle at least once a week
is significantly lower (12.3%) than the Bristol average (24.3%). This difference is less for
those who are Disabled and who cycle
Page to work
165 (11.2%) and the Bristol average (15.4%).
Sustrans Provision of accessible, secure, on-street cycle parking could particularly impact Disabled
Walking and people who cycle at least once a week positively.
Cycling Index
The Sustrans Walking and Cycling Index shows that the percentage of Disabled people
(18%) was significantly lower than the percentage of non-Disabled people (32%) who
cycled at least once a week in 2023.

The percentage of Disabled residents for whom a lack of transport options prevents them from
leaving their home when they want to be significantly worse (33.1%) than the Bristol average
(22.4%).

The percentage of Disabled people in Bristol for whom air pollution prevents them from leaving
their home when they want to is significantly higher (8.2%) than the Bristol average (4.8%).

Sex The percentages of men (17.2%) and women (13.3%) who cycle to work in Bristol are
Quality of similar to the Bristol average (15.4%).
Life Survey
2024/25 However, when considering the percentage of people who cycle at least once a week, the
figures for both men and women are significantly different; 19.1% of women compared
to 29.5% of men cycle at least once a week.

In both these indicators, less women cycle either for work or at least once a week than
men. Providing access to secure cycle storage could particularly improve women’s access
and ability to cycle and cycle regularly.

Sustrans The Sustrans Walking and Cycling Index shows that the percentage of women who cycle at least
Walking and once a week decreased by 2% between 2021 and 2023. This is also significantly lower than the
Cycling Index percentage of men who cycle at least once a week, reflecting the results of the Quality of Life
survey.

Sexual A similar % of LGB+ residents cycle at least once a week (24.1%) as the Bristol average
orientation (24.3%) and cycle to work (17.4%) as the Bristol average (15.4%).
Gender A similar % of Trans residents cycle at least once a week (23.8%) as the Bristol average
reassignment (24.3%) and cycle to work (17.4%) as the Bristol average (15.4%).
Page 166
Quality of
Life Survey
2024/25
Race Indicator Bristol average
Census 2021 % White total 81.1%

% Black, Asian and Minority 18.9%
Ethnic Group

Quality of In Bristol, the percentage of residents who are Black, Asian and minority ethnic is significantly
Life Survey lower (9.1%) than the percentage of white residents (16.2%), who cycle to work. The percentage
2024/25 of residents who are Black, Asian and minority ethnic is also significantly lower (19.1%) than the
percentage of white residents (25%) who cycle at least once a week.
Religion or Indicator Bristol average
Belief % no religion 51.4%
Census 2021 % Christian 32.2%

% Muslim 6.7%
% Hindu 0.8%

% Sikh 0.5%
% other religion 0.7%
% Buddhist 0.6%

% Jewish 0.4%

% religion not 6.9%
stated

• The % of residents who are Christian or Muslim who walk or cycle to work (23.9% and 20.8%
Quality of
Life Survey respectively is significantly lower than the Bristol average (35.5%), than those of Other
2024/25 Religion (40.4%) and than the % of residents who have no religion or faith (41.9%).
• The % of residents who are Christian who drive to work is higher (39.9%) than the Bristol
average (34.4%) but the % of those who are not religious is lower (32.7%).
• The % of residents who are Christian (9.9%) and Muslim (2.2%) who cycle to work is
significantly lower than the Bristol average (15.4). The % of residents who are not religious
(18.4%) is significantly higher than the Bristol average.

Marriage & There is no evidence to suggest that this protected characteristic group might experience
civil transport differently today.
partnership
Socio- Indicator Bristol average
economic
(deprivation) % of children 21.0%
living in low-
2019 income families
National
Deprivation
Deciles by
Lower Layer
Super Output
Area

Page 167
Quality of
Life Survey
2024/25

The graph above details that the 10% most deprived have the least likelihood to walk or wheel to
work, at just 11.7%. This does however rise quickly with the 10-20% and 20-30% deciles, and stays
around the average for each thereafter, with the 60-70% decile the most likely to walk or wheel
to work at 24.7%.

Overall, if there was more secure parking in the form of hangars, this would support those already
cycling in the city and perhaps encourage more residents in Bristol to either take up cycling or
cycle more frequently.

Carers Indicator Bristol average
Quality of % people who 7.6%
Life Survey provide unpaid
2023/24 care

Indicator Bristol average
Quality of
Life Survey % whose caring 2.8%
2024/25 responsibility
for someone
with a health
condition or
impairment
prevent them
from leaving
their home
when they want
to.

Additional comments:

Do you have relevant diversity data for the following protected characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☒ Gender Reassignment
☐ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☐ Pregnancy/Maternity ☒ Race
☒ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☒ Sexual Orientation

Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
Whilst it is a challenge to engage with all our citizens and we know that there are some groups with seldom heard
voices with whom we can do a better job at engaging with, recent surveys do capture a credible snapshot of
feeling on several key issues Bristol continues to face. Results 168
Page from the Quality of Life, Your City Our Future
(related to the Covid-19 pandemic and subsequent lockdowns) and Bristol Citizens Assembly, highlighted many of
the imbalances and feelings of inequality across the city and made recommendations for change.

While we aim to collect diversity data for all relevant characteristics, there are some gaps in the local data
available, particularly for characteristics that haven't always been included in past census or statutory reports.
Additionally, there are gaps in our workforce diversity data due to under-reporting, as this information is
voluntarily provided by staff and remains confidential.

How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
No public facing engagement has taken place so far as this policy is for setting a target for cycle hanger
rollout across the city. Officers have engaged internally with the Citywide Initiatives Team, who will be
responsible for the delivery of cycle hangars moving forward. Informative discussions have been had
with project managers of previous rounds of cycle hangar installation in Bristol and when the funding is
secured for the hangars, engagement as outlined in the below box will be carried out.

How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
Engagement will continue with internal teams at the following meetings:

• Executive Director Meeting on the 22nd August 2025
• Policy Committee Chair Briefing on the 18th September 2025
• Agenda Briefing on the 2nd October 2025

In line with the approach taken with previous rounds of cycle hangar delivery, consultation will occur in the form
of a city-wide (and Combined Authority-wide should funding be received at this level) wave of resident requests,
which will then be sifted for appropriate sites of delivery. As cycle hangars require a Traffic Regulation Order,
there will be a statutory consultation period and an objection report will be written up if required. In later delivery
waves, a mix of targeted and request-based delivery is planned. As such where areas are determined to have
above a certain threshold of households with Terraced, Flat, Shared, Converted or Commercial properties, street-
level consultation will take place, with letter drops and other forms of light-touch local engagement.

This EqIA will be updated to reflect any changes or updates to this.

Step 3: Who might the proposal impact? [complete if ‘Yes’ to an equality impact]

Could the proposal affect people disproportionately because of their characteristics?
GENERAL COMMENTS
The interrelated issues that Bristol faces regarding health and economic inequality, and the climate emergency
and need for low-carbon solutions to these problems, create an urgent need for the Council to take actions that
may disproportionately impact residents. Transport is a key part of this, and as such all Bristol citizens will be
impacted by future sustainable transport interventions in the city, as the way we move around changes.

The policy proposal referred to here is a functional and essential change to the city’s cycle infrastructure, any
disproportionate effects on some residents will be captured during the consultation and request processes. The
context within which it is set will continue to improve cycle infrastructure and access to the detriment of the ease
of access of the private car.

All people living and working in Bristol, including those with protected characteristics, will benefit from more
inclusive transport policies such as this one, which encourage the widest layers of the population to move actively,
and safely. Those who still need the car will be quite free to do so, but for those who do not want to, or cannot
drive, an improved and more legible cycle infrastructure will have benefits that greatly outweighs those of a
business-as-usual scenario for climate, health, and equality.

Contractors Page 169
Contractors would be completing and maintaining the cycle hangars.
• Contractors will be made to adhere to equalities guidelines and limit any possible disruptions.
• Whilst we have not identified any significant negative impact from the proposal, we are aware that
disruption during works may have a disproportionate impact on some groups.
• As part of the quality scoring assessment for joining the Framework, providers will be required to
demonstrate a good understanding of Equality Act 2010 requirements and the public sector equality duty;
including that equality of opportunity is central to internal processes / workforce; and services will be
regularly tailored and reviewed to meet the diverse needs of Bristol citizens.

Mitigations

While no immediate negative impacts of this policy have been identified, we are aware of existing
disproportionate impacts with relation to transport as outlined below. Any disproportionate impacts of existing
infrastructure would be mitigated through this policy as this policy aims to improve residents’ access to a
sustainable, affordable transport option. Bristol City Council has a commitment to limit disproportionate impacts
upon any of the protected characteristics listed in the Equality Assessment.

One key mitigation that has been outlined by a recent WECIL report on the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
trial was the placement of handles on cycle hangars, and especially the model of hangar installed with a handle
lower to the ground, which can be difficult to access for some Disabled or older people. Options for more
accessible, higher handle placement will be explored with the hangar operator.

Key References:
[1] Transport and inequality: An evidence review for the Department for Transport, NatCen, 2019
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/953951/Tra
nsport_and_inequality_report_document.pdf
[2] Access to transport and life opportunities, NatCen, 2019
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/831766/acc
ess_to_transport_report.pdf
[3] FS13 Future of Transport – Equalities and access to opportunity, FS13 Rapid Evidence Review, Department for
Transport, 2020
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/937223/F13
-Future-of-Transport-Equalities-access-to-opportunity-rapid-evidence-review-accessible.pdf

PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Currently young people in Bristol are:
• Identified as a group at risk of transport poverty [1]
• Vehicle ownership tends to be low among younger age groups
partly due to the costs of learning to drive, as well as maintaining a
vehicle and the associated insurance costs, making this group
increasingly reliant on public transport. [3]
• Transport affordability and availability are key challenges for
younger people relying on public transport to access work, education,
and other activities. [3]
• The availability and affordability of transport can contribute to
children’s access to important resources. [3]
• Active travel presents an opportunity to promote health and
wellbeing among children. This is particularly important for children who
are more likely to develop childhood obesity due to other
characteristics, including deprivation and Black, Asian, and minoritised
ethnic background. [3]

Page 170
• The effects of air pollution are particularly significant for the health
of children. [3]
• Children from a lower socio-economic background are also more
likely to be exposed to high levels of pollution due to living in densely
populated urban areas. [3]

The percentage of young people who cycle to work or cycle at least once a week in
Bristol is broadly similar to the Bristol average, therefore no disproportionate impact
is expected in this regard. However, the percentage of young people for whom lack
of transport options prevents them from leaving their home when they want to is
significantly worse than the Bristol average. Installing cycle hangars in residential
areas could therefore disproportionately, positively impact these young people, by
helping to provide an affordable and secure form of cycle storage which hopes to
broaden their transport options.
Mitigations: No mitigations needed as a positive impact is anticipated.
Age: Older People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • Identified as a group at higher risk of transport poverty [1]
• Identified as a group at risk of poverty [1]
• Older people are more likely to be Disabled or have a long-term health
problem that can affect their ability to use transport, including: mobility
impairments, hearing impairments and cognitive impairments. [3]
• Research from Age UK has found that an improved provision of active
transport (including walking and cycling) could disproportionately benefit
older people. Increased provision of active transport is likely to improve the
amount of physical activity, which is linked to better cognitive performance,
better mental health outcomes and reduce overall morbidity and mortality.
[3]
• Currently only 8% of men and 3% of women over the age of 65 in the UK
cycle, a much lower proportion compared to both the general population in
the UK and those over the age of 65 in European countries. [3]

The percentage of older people who cycle to work or cycle at least once a
week in Bristol are both significantly lower than the Bristol average, which
infers that this policy may be less beneficial to older people than it might be
to the rest of Bristol’s population.

As a cycle hangar uses one parking space, there is a chance that this may have
a negative impact on an older person who is perhaps more reliant on a
vehicle. However, in terms of commuting, a significantly lower percentage of
older people drive to work than the Bristol population.

For those older people who do cycle regularly, there will a positive impact as
there will be provision of easily accessible on-street secure cycle parking.
Mitigations: To mitigate the potential impact of removing a car parking space, there will be
an opportunity for residents to object to the location of a proposed cycle
hangar through the Traffic Regulation Order process and this will be taken
into consideration when deciding the location.
Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: • Undertaking an analysis of current transport trends among Disabled people
it is important to note that Disabled people are not a homogenous group,
their needs and abilities can vary greatly depending on the nature and
severity of their disability.
Page 171 [3]
• Appropriate transport provision enables Disabled people to participate in
their community, maintain social networks, and access employment,
education, healthcare and other services. [3]
• The unemployment rate in the UK for Disabled people was 6.7% in 2019,
despite this rate having reduced, it is still nearly double the national
unemployment rate. Evidence shows that difficulty in accessing transport is
the second most common barrier to work among Disabled people. [3]
• For neurodiverse people, a lack of routine or unexpected events can
become overwhelming, leading to high levels of stress and anxiety. [3]
• Disabled passengers often travel to, from and between legs of their journey
via various transport modes, sometimes with challenges to the successful
completion of the first and last mile of a journey. [3]
• Air quality depletion linked to traffic exhaust emissions can have detrimental
effects on certain groups of Disabled people. The British Lung Foundation
states those at highest risk to air pollution effects are those already living
with pre-existing health conditions, predominantly those with such lung
conditions as asthma or Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). [3]
As a cycle hangar uses one parking space, there is a chance that this may have
a negative impact on a Disabled person who is perhaps more reliant on a
vehicle.

In terms of the hangars themselves, the standard hangar design does not
accommodate for those that use adapted cycles, which could mean that a
Disabled person who uses an adapted cycle would not benefit from a
standard cycle hangar on their street.
Mitigations: To mitigate the potential impact of removing a car parking space, there will be
an opportunity for residents to object to the location of a proposed cycle
hangar through the Traffic Regulation Order process and this will be taken
into consideration when deciding the location.

It could be possible for this to be considered on a case by case or request
basis with the future secured funding and the rollout of hangars across the
city but this will be decided by the BCC delivery team.
Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Women:
• Identified as a group at risk of transport poverty [1]
• Having less access to private means of transport such as bicycles,
motorcycles and cars, women are inclined to take work closer to home,
often in the informal sector, which may limit their opportunities for finding
better paid or higher skilled positions. This may be exacerbated by a limited
availability of part-time work or work that fits around school hours. [1]

There may also be a disproportionate positive impact on this group – the
Quality of Life survey shows that less women cycle to work and cycle at least
once a week than men. In providing accessible and secure cycle parking, this
may improve women’s ability to cycle to work and cycle at least once a week.
Mitigations: No mitigations needed as positive impact.
Sexual orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: There is no data to suggest any kind of disproportionate impact on those with this
protected characteristic.
Page 172
Mitigations:
Pregnancy / Maternity Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: - Caring responsibilities also tend to disproportionately fall to women and
often require making multiple short journeys during a day – for example, to
drop off children at school, visit family members and shop for food – which
creates an additional challenge if private transport is not available. In such
cases public transport services may not sufficiently interconnected, requiring
journeys with several changes and a long commuting time. [3]
- Research evidences that gender inequality in cycling is common, with low
levels of cycling among women compared to men. This could be due to
cultural factors that remain in place despite an increase in the promotion of
active travel. Promoting gender quality and normalising cycling culturally
could benefit women in increasing the numbers of those cycling regularly [3]
- Women are more likely to make trips with children so may be more
likely to use a cargo bike. Currently, the standard cycle hangar does
not allow enough space for a cargo bike to be stored. In this way, and
due to the loss of a parking space, there may be a disproportionate
impact on females travelling with a child.
- Parents and families are also more likely to lack cycle storage for
multiple bikes. This is important for the policy as this is likely to
increase demand of a particular hangar for one household.
Mitigations: - There is scope for the policy to include that cycle hangars that can
accommodate adapted cycles and cargo bikes on request from
residents although this has not been confirmed at this stage.
- The policy hopes to fulfil demand for all household types, in keeping a
fair and equitable process.
Gender reassignment Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: There is no data to suggest any kind of disproportionate impact on those with this
protected characteristic.
Mitigations:
Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts:
• Black, Asian, and minoritised ethnic households consistently have the highest
rates of poverty, and White British households have the lowest [1]
• Adults from Asian, Black or other ethnic groups took substantially fewer trips
per person in 2017 than those from white or mixed groups. [1]
• In terms of cycling, DfT data suggests that Black and Asian adults are least
likely to cycle [3]
Due to lower rates of cycling among the Black, Asian and minority
communities, the demand for cycle hangar spaces is likely to be stronger in
areas with higher populations of white residents (Walking and Cycling Index).
This can cause the Black, Asian and minority race communities to become
seldom heard voices and keep cycling rates low among this respective
community as the city continues to not provide safe cycle storage spread
across to wide ranges of residents.
Mitigations: However, initially, the policy would aim to fulfil needs on a demand basis. This
process may be able to be controlled by filling out a request questionnaire.
Using this survey, it could be one way in which we provide cycle storage to
minority race residents in hope to increase cycle mobility among the
communities. However, this is not a promise, and BCC will remain fair and
equitable in the roll out of this and all future policies.
Page 173
Religion or Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Belief
Potential impacts: There is no data to suggest any kind of disproportionate impact on those with this
protected characteristic.
Mitigations:
Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
civil partnership
Potential impacts: Marriage / civil partnerships are likely to have higher likelihood of sharing a
room in Flats, Shared Occupancy, Converted or Commercial properties. This is
disproportionate to single residents in Bristol, so demands of cycle storage
may be higher for this protected characteristic as they are more likely to lack
the current space to store two or more bikes in their current properties.
Mitigations: However, the policy would aim to fulfil needs on a demand basis. This process
may be able to be controlled by filling out a request questionnaire. Using this
survey, it could be one way in which we provide cycle storage to residents
who lack space in marriages / civil partnerships. However, this is not a
promise, and BCC will remain fair and equitable in the roll out of this and all
future policies.
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS
Socio-economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: • Income was found to be one of the defining aspects of socio-economic
inequality. Transport costs and affordability are central to the impact of
transport on inequality. If transport is too expensive, then people are not
able to make the journeys they need to get into work or move into
education and training that could improve their prospects [1]
• Transport is important in obtaining a job, keeping a job, or getting a better
job. Improving provision for cycling can also have a positive impact on
employment opportunities. [1]
• Cycling is regarded as a good way to widen travel horizons for
disadvantaged individuals. [1]
• Lower income households have higher levels of non-car ownership – female
heads of house, children, younger and older people, people from a Black,
Asian and minoritised ethnic background and Disabled people are often
concentrated in this statistic. [3]
• Increasing promotion and provision of active transport directly benefits
people who reside in deprived areas by improving the local air quality and
improving their health and wellbeing. For example, obesity rates for
children are highest amongst those in deprived areas. [3]
• Ensuring feelings of safety are increased will encourage more people to
participate in active travel modes. [3]
Socio-economic deprivation is higher among the populations who do not own
a car or live in socially rented or council owned property. However, bike
ownership is also particularly low due to the lack of secure cycle parking
citywide in this accommodation type, leaving the most deprived the most
immobile in the Bristol community
Mitigations: This policy will provide a positive impact to this protected characteristic as it
pledges to provide cycle storage to uplift active mobility. Although this will be
done on a request basis initially, once these have been fulfilled, the location
of hangars could be based on a more targeted approach, providing hangars
for more deprived communities in Bristol.
Page 174
Care Experienced Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: There is no data to suggest any kind of disproportionate impact on those with this
protected characteristic.
Mitigations:
Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: There is no data to suggest any kind of disproportionate impact on those with this
protected characteristic.
Mitigations:
Other groups
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:

Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their characteristics?
Parking a bike inside brings in dirt, causes clutter and reduces living space. Bristol terraced housing
frequently lacks garden access, creating inconvenience and mess even if opting for outdoor garden
storage. Landlords or letting agencies may not permit internal storage at all; a higher-than-average
Bristol renting rate of 45.2% against 37.5% for England and Wales making this yet more pressing. Flats,
Shared Occupancy, Converted or Commercial properties also each have their own challenges for internal
bicycle storage. Safe cycle storage has been seen to increase bike ownership by 24%, and 94% of users
find cycle hangars both secure and easy to use, increasing trips by 1.44 on average per week. For
hangars previously installed at social housing sites, Sustrans’ Cycle Hangars Evaluation Report estimates
£1.77 of economic benefit for every £1 spent, and that those assigned a cycle hangar space increased
the number of cycle trips they make by 62%.
Bristol’s 2023 Quality of Life Survey found a 7% gap between the most deprived decile and the city
average for people cycling at least once a week (reducing to 4.6% in the 2024 survey). As a key barrier to
cycling, a lack of safe storage in areas of high deprivation must be addressed as a matter of equality.
Protected groups such as Disabled or older people are often excluded from cycling when storage would
involve lifting over steps, up sets of stairs, or awkward movements down narrow corridors. A cycle
hangar policy aims to make setting off by bike as easy and accessible as by car.

A city which is more active is one that is cleaner, more equitable and better connected. Its citizens are
less lonely due to barriers to independent travel being removed and have the mental and physical health
benefits of regular exercise. With an improved active travel offer, those without the means to drive are
nonetheless able to benefit from a modern, safe transport network.

With fewer people driving for short journeys, air quality improves, and general emissions decrease. In
the long-term, the overall energy usage per capita of the Bristol transport network will be much lower
with greater active travel uptake, and overall emissions of greenhouse gases will decrease.

When implemented alongside other key changes to infrastructure in the city, a cycle hangar policy will
enable more people to choose to travel by bike, and bring a host of benefits for health, sociability,
sustainability and equality.

Step 4: Impact [complete if ‘Yes’ to an equality impact]

Has this equality impact assessment led to any changes?
No

Page 175
Action Plan
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale
The Citywide Initiatives Team will review the contract held with Citywide Initiatives At funding
LockItSafe to ensure it maximises the benefits to residents. Team securement

How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
The impact of the proposal will be indicated by the level of uptake of the spaces in cycle hangars installed under
this policy. In the longer term, this might also be measured by monitoring Quality of Life data annually, to
understand whether any increase in cycling uptake can be attributed to access to a cycle hangar space up to 2030.

Step 5: Review
Equality and Inclusion Team Review Director Sign-Off: Alex Hearn

Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

Date: 15/08/25 Date: 15/08/25

Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.

Page 176
Environmental Impact Assessment [version 1.0]

Proposal title: Cycle Hangar Policy
Project stage and type: ☒ Initial Idea Mandate ☐ Outline Business Case ☐ Full Business Case
☒ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☒ New ☐ Changing
☐ Other [please state] ☐ Already exists / review
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Anthony Davies, Hannah Tyas, Naina
Johal
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Transport Strategy Officer

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of this Environmental Impact Assessment is to help you develop your proposal in a way that is
compliant with the council’s policies and supports the council’s strategic objectives under the One City Climate
Strategy, the One City Ecological Emergency Strategy and the latest Corporate Strategy.
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the project proposal process by someone with a good
knowledge of the project, the service area that will deliver it, and sufficient influence over the proposal to make
changes as needed.
It is good practice to take a team approach to completing the Environmental Impact Assessment. See further
guidance on completing this document. Please email environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk early for advice
and feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Please use plain English, avoiding jargon and
acronyms.

A cycle hangar policy is intended to provide Bristol residents with a safe place to store a bike on the kerbside,
where storage options in dwellings are limited. The policy is setting the future approach and a target for delivery
of cycle hangars, proposing a total of at least 500 by 2030.

The policy is needed to set the ambition for providing secure on-street parking, especially for areas where demand
has been proven to exist, such as terraced housing, or flats without storage included.

1.2 Will the proposal have an environmental impact?
Could the proposal have either a positive or negative effects for the environment now or in the future? If ‘No’
explain why you are sure there will be no environmental impact, then skip steps 2-3 and request review by sending
this form to environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk

If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment.
☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

1.3 If the proposal is part of an options appraisal, has the environmental impact of each option
been assessed and included in the recommendation-making process?
If ‘Yes’ please ensure that the details of the environmental impacts of each option are made clear in the pros and
cons section of the project management options appraisal document.
Page 177
☐ Yes ☐ No ☒ Not applicable [please select]

If ‘No’ explain why environmental impacts have not been considered as part of the options appraisal process.

Step 2: What kinds of environmental impacts might the project have?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying
potential impacts.

Does the proposal create any benefits for the environment, or have any adverse impacts?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our corporate environmental objectives and the wider One City Climate and Ecological Emergency
strategies.
Consider how the proposal creates environmental impacts in the following categories, both now and in the future.
Reasonable efforts should be made to quantify stated benefit or adverse impacts wherever possible.

Where the proposal is likely to have a beneficial impact, consider what actions would enhance those impacts. Where
the proposal is likely to have a harmful impact, consider whether actions would mitigate these impacts.

Enhancements or mitigation actions are only required when there is a likely impact identified. Remember that where
enhancements or mitigation actions are listed, they should be assigned to staff and appropriately resourced.

GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many categories)

A cycle hangar policy that aims to greatly increase the number of secure on-street parking locations will
encourage more residents to cycle. The 2023 Sustrans Cycle Hangar Evaluation report showed that safe cycle
storage has been seen to increase bike ownership by 24%, and 94% of users find cycle hangars both secure and
easy to use, increasing trips by 1.44 on average per week.

With more Bristol citizens cycling, greenhouse emissions from transport, especially for short to medium trips that
are currently being taken by car, will decrease, reducing the cities cumulative environmental impact.

ENV1 Carbon neutral:
Emissions of climate The delivery of the policy in the years up to 2030 will be a
changing gases contributing factor in approaching net zero targets. Modal shift is
individual and multifaceted; cycle journeys begin much earlier than
Benefits
BCC has committed to the first interaction with a cycle route. An ambitious cycle hangar
achieving net zero emissions target policy will support the first and last minute of cyclist journeys
for its direct activities by in Bristol, and assist with allowing more people to opt for the bike
2025, and to support the city over the car.
in achieving net zero by
2030. Targeted monitoring of uptake in cycling journeys with a focus on
understanding the extent to which car journeys are shifted to cycling
Will the proposal involve Enhancing in areas which receive cycle hangers. This will be undertaken with
transport, or the use of actions standard monitoring survey questions accompanying other BCC travel
energy in buildings? Will the offers.
proposal involve the
purchase of goods or
services? If the answer is yes Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years

Page 178
to either of these questions,
there will be a carbon Cycle hangars come with a known quantity of embedded carbon; the
impact. Adverse installation of the hangar itself, as well as bollards or concrete pads,
impacts all have greenhouse gas emissions embedded in the process.
Consider the scale and
timeframe of the impact,
particularly if the proposal
will lead to ongoing
Concrete pads, due to cost and immovability, have been phased out
emissions beyond the 2025
of the installation of hangars since previous rounds. Installation will
and 2030 target dates. Mitigating
be as efficient as possible and use low emissions processes wherever
actions
available.
Further guidance
☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☒ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

ENV2 Ecological recovery:
Wildlife and habitats All cycle hangers are expected to be placed on existing hard standing
BCC has committed to 30% and will not affect existing trees.
Benefits
of its land being managed
for nature and to halve its
use of pesticides by 2030.

Consider how your proposal Commitment from project team to ensure that existing street trees
can support increased space Enhancing are retained / not impacted by the siting of any cycle hangers in the
for nature, reduced use of actions programme.
pesticides, reduce pollution
to waterways, and reduce
consumption of products Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
that undermine ecosystems
around the world. N/A
Adverse
If your proposal will directly impacts
lead to a reduction in habitat
within Bristol, then consider
how your proposed
mitigation can lead to a
biodiversity net gain. Be sure
to refer to quantifiable Mitigating
changes wherever possible. actions

Further guidance
☐ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Per-capita resource consumption of bicycles versus cars is far lower. A
ENV3 A cleaner, low-waste
cycle hangar policy that is able to encourage ownership of bikes over
city: Consumption of
cars for short trips will reduce the waste and resource consumption
resources and generation of
Benefits that cars are responsible for.
waste
The cycle hangers are predominantly made from metal which will be
recycled at the end of the hangers’ operational life.

Page 179
Consider what resources will
be used as a result of the Other council and national interventions will be required to allow
proposal, how they can be Enhancing journeys that are currently only possible, or are much easier by car, to
minimised or swapped for actions be made with public transport, or through the use of shared car clubs
less impactful ones, where or other shared mobility means.
they will be sourced from,
and what will happen to any Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
waste generated
There is a known quantity consumption of resources for the
construction of hangars and their installation.
Adverse
impacts

Further guidance
Certain aspects with greater resource consumption that may not
Mitigating prove necessary, such as concrete base pads, are being left out of
☐ No impact actions delivery wherever possible. This has the added benefit of reduced
cost.

Persistence of effects: ☒ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

All cycle hangers are expected to be placed on existing hard standing
ENV4 Climate resilience:
and will not affect existing trees – important for their contribution to
Bristol’s resilience to the Benefits urban greening factor / cooling during heatwaves.
effects of climate change

Bristol’s climate is already
changing, and increasingly
frequent instances of Commitment from project team to ensure that existing street trees
extreme weather will Enhancing are retained / not impacted by the siting of any cycle hangers in the
become more likely over actions programme.
time.

Consider how the proposal
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
will perform during periods
of extreme weather
(particularly heat and N/A
Adverse
flooding).
impacts

Consider if the proposal will
reduce or increase risk to
people and assets during
extreme weather events.
Mitigating
actions
Further guidance
☒ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Statutory duty: The delivery of the policy in the years up to 2030 will be a
Prevention of Pollution to Benefits contributing factor in improving air quality. Modal shift is individual
air, water, or land and multifaceted; cycle journeys begin much earlier than the first
interaction with a cycle route. An ambitious cycle hangar target policy

Page 180
will support the first and last minute of cyclist journeys in Bristol, and
assist with allowing more people to opt for the bike over the car.
Consider how the proposal
will change the likelihood of
pollution occurring to air,
water, or land and what
steps will be taken to Targeted monitoring of uptake in cycling journeys with a focus on
Enhancing
prevent pollution occurring. actions understanding the extent to which car journeys are shifted to cycling
in areas which receive cycle hangers.

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Further guidance Adverse
impacts
☐ No impact

Mitigating
actions

Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Step 3: Action Plan
Use this section summarise and assign responsibility for any actions you have identified to improve data, enhance
beneficial, or mitigate negative impacts. Actions identified in section two can be grouped together if named
responsibility is under the same person.
This action plan should be updated at each stage of the project. Please be aware that the Sustainable City and
Climate Change Service may use this action plan as an audit checklist during the project’s implementation or
operation.
Enhancing / mitigating action required Responsible Officer Timescale
Citywide Initiatives (delivery team) to review and/or benchmark Anthony Davies 3+ years, no current
hangar space allocation, to provide priority spaces to people willing (Policy)/ Jon Legge plans to update
to use the hangar to reduce their car usage. (Citywide Initiatives) contract, but this has
verbal confirmation
during policy
development

Action update 18
months from policy
approval – April
2027

Commitment from project team to ensure that existing street trees Anthony Davies 2026-2030
are retained / not impacted by the siting of any cycle hangers in (Policy)/ Jon Legge
the programme. (Citywide Initiatives) Continued
commitment
thereafter

Targeted monitoring of uptake in cycling journeys with a focus on James Morvan 2026-2030
understanding the extent to which car journeys are shifted to (Engagement)/ Jon
cycling in areas which receive cycle hangers. Legge (Citywide Continued
Initiatives) thereafter

Page 181
Step 4: Review
The Sustainable City and Climate Change Service need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your
impact assessment. Assessments should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for
decision-makers on the environmental impact of the proposal.
Please seek feedback and review by emailing environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk before final submission of
your decision pathway documentation1.
Where impacts identified in this assessment are deemed significant, they will be summarised here by the Sustainable
City and Climate Change Service and must be included in the ‘evidence base’ section of the decision pathway cover
sheet.

Summary of significant beneficial impacts and opportunities to support the Climate, Ecological and Corporate
Strategies (ENV1,2,3,4):
ENV1 Carbon neutral: Emissions of climate changing gases

A cycle hangar policy works towards Bristol’s One City goal of being climate neutral in transport, requiring a 40%
reduction in vehicle miles by 2030. Providing more people with the opportunity to safely store a bike has been
proven to increase ownership and rates of cycling, and contributes to a shift in transport mode prevalence away
from greenhouse-gas-emitting vehicles.

ENV2 Ecological recovery: Wildlife and habitats

Ecological recovery is not within the remit of the cycle hangar policy; other forthcoming wider approaches to the
kerbside space, including the Kerbside Strategy, will be responsible for improving green space and habitat
provision on Council adopted highway.

ENV3 A cleaner, low-waste city: Consumption of resources and generation of waste

As with all efforts towards net zero, consumption of resources per capita is expected to drop with a reduction in
car dependency. The resources required for raw materials, shipping, assembly and eventual disposal is
magnitudes lower for bikes than cars. Cycle hangars, too, are far less resource-intensive than a car to produce and
install, and will remain in place indefinitely, until maintenance issues result in a replacement.

ENV4 Climate resilience: Bristol’s resilience to the effects of climate change

A cycle hangar policy is not expected to directly alleviate the effects of climate change, but will aid in mitigation of
its causes in the form of greenhouse gas emissions reduction, and per capita resource reduction.

Summary of significant adverse impacts and how they can be mitigated:

No significant adverse impacts are anticipated.

Environmental Performance Team Reviewer: Submitting author:

Daniel Shelton Anthony Davies
Date: Date:
21/08/25 19/08/2025

1 Review by the Sustainable City and Climate Change Service confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers
Page
to consider the likely environmental impacts at this stage. 182
This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
Agenda Item 11

Committee Report

KEY DECISION OR FOR INFORMATION: Key decision affects 2 or more wards

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 23 October 2025

TITLE: Centreline Policy on residential and selected 20 mph roads.

Ward(s): Citywide

Officer presenting the report: Shaun Taylor Job title: Head of Highways

Committee Chair: Councillor Ed Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: Committee Chair

Purpose of Report:

1. To seek approval from the Transport and Connectivity Committee on a policy position that
road centrelines on selected 20mph roads are not reinstated as default following
resurfacing so that road safety benefits are realised by this maintenance programme, and
are only reinstated where determined essential by the Road Safety Team. Alongside this,
the safeguarding process for reviewing and implementing changes is presented.

Evidence Base

1. The City Council has adopted a Safe Systems Approach to Road Safety where all
elements of the road system should work together to minimise the chance of a crash, and
in the event of a crash, to prevent someone being killed or seriously injured.
2. One of the key approaches in the Safe Systems Approach to Road Safety is ‘safe speeds’
reflecting research that a reduction in speed helps to reduce the severity and volume of
collisions. Therefore, opportunities are sought to encourage lower speeds through road
safety interventions and other highway projects and workstreams.
3. Research has shown that motorists tend to slow down when a centreline is absent in
certain circumstances as they adjust for their uncertainty over their positioning on the road
and that of other drivers. This has also shown that this has not led to a corresponding
increase in collisions overall on slower residential roads. (Contribution to cycle safety of
centre line removal on 20 mph and 30 mph speed limit roads - Adrian Davis, Alan Tapp,
Stella Warren, Bristol Business School, Faculty of Business & Law, 2019)
4. Other research has shown that the speed of vehicles overtaking cyclists reduces with the
absence of a road centreline. (Influence of road markings, lane widths and driver behaviour
on proximity and speed of vehicles overtaking cyclists - Stella C. Shackel, John Parkin
2014)
Template approved March 25
Page 183
OFFICIAL
5. The resurfacing and surface dressing programmes provide an opportunity to amend road
markings and encourage this behaviour on existing roads by only reinstating centrelines
where they were considered necessary on road safety grounds. In some cases there may
be little need for the centre lines and other road markings, and their presence may be due
to historic reasons meaning they are no longer needed in any case.
6. For example, as can be seen in the picture of a recently surface-dressed road, with the
expansion of car ownership over the last 50 years many roads now have significantly more
parking along both sides of the road and the historic road markings are simply not needed.

As per the legal comments below, it is important to state there is no requirement in law to
provide centre lines on all roads and that all legally required lines, for example at junctions
and traffic signals will be provided.
7. Although there is no legal requirements for 20mph surface roundels to be reinstated for the
speed limit to be enforceable, they will usually be reinstated. Any roundels or other
markings should be placed away from parked vehicles.
8. Removing centrelines is technically straight forward to do when roads are resurfaced
through routine maintenance and can provide an initial saving in capital and reduces future
revenue maintenance costs.
9. After consideration and discussion with a variety of disciplines within Transport and Urban
Design teams, the Quality Assurance Board for transport capital schemes previously
recommended that road centrelines would not be reinstated following resurfacing or
surface dressing of 20mph roads unless, following a case-by-case review, they were
deemed essential to maintaining safety along the route.
10. The process for achieving this involves two separate teams, Highways Maintenance to put
the surfacing programmes together and deliver any changes agreed and Road Safety to
review the programmes and recommend where road centrelines should or should not be
reinstated. Both teams are then involved in handling feedback from residents and
Councillors concerned about road safety in the absence of these road markings following
both programmes.
11. The process to review each section of road due for resurfacing, redesign the road markings
and mark out and supervise the work adds some amount of additional work per site shared
across both teams involved.
12. The newly established Road Safety Team now have additional resources and can review
these programmes and provide appropriate advice to Highway Maintenance. The Highway
Maintenance teams likewise have the skills and processes in place to set out any changes
on site and supervise the contractor accordingly.
Template approved March 25
Page 184
OFFICIAL
13. As the surfacing programmes are annual programmes, the centreline reinstatement
process could move to a two-year programme post the annual resurfacing treatment, which
can reduce the risks and challenges above. This would mean that in year 1, centrelines
are only installed on those higher risk roads where the road safety team identifies a need
for them. These would be monitored over the course of the next 12 months by the Road
Safety Team and if concerns do become apparent or valid complaints are received,
appropriate sections of centreline could be reinstated in year 2 as part of the programme of
road markings across the city.
14. The overall concept of improving safety by removing road centrelines is a difficult one for
people not working in the field to contemplate and so concerns and complaints will also be
received when centrelines are not reinstated following resurfacing work. A short templated
response will be used to respond to these concerns alongside the review process
described above
15. The option above does provide other challenges as the lining is now procured as part of the
dressing so if the decision is reversed this will require a new contract and new contractor
so will add cost to reinstatement and officer resources.
16. The proposed process is shown on page 3 of Appendix A.

Alternative options considered:

1. Maintain the current approach that all road centrelines are reinstated like for like post
resurfacing programmes. This would reduce the staff time required by both teams but
would not help realise the safety and longer terms maintenance cost savings.

2. Assume the same default policy decision of not reinstating centrelines post resurfacing
programmes unless there is a road safety need, but without the year 2 review as part of
this process enabling further amendments post monitoring. This would realise the same
initial benefits as to the current proposal and would reduce the additional work required by
both teams to monitor and implement any changes in year 2. However, if valid concerns
are raised or identified following the non-reinstatement of the centrelines, additional capital
funding and resources would need to be found to make changes outside of the resurfacing
programme. This would be much more difficult to achieve as lining contractors are unlikely
to accept the small scale works orders that would be required.

Officer Recommendations:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity
1. Approves the policy the default position of not reinstating centreline road markings post
resurfacing programmes on residential streets and selected 20mph speed limit unless there
is a specific road safety concern.
2. Approves the proposed process set out in Appendix A.

Corporate Strategy alignment:

1. This brief aligns with the Corporate Strategy, including its Vision to “create a sustainable
and equitable Bristol that enables everyone to be safe, well and thrive”, and priority 4
“Making it easier, greener and safer to travel into and around Bristol”.

City Benefits:

Template approved March 25
Page 185
OFFICIAL
1. The City Council has adopted a Safe Systems Approach to Road Safety and has a target
of zero people killed or seriously injured in road traffic collisions by 2030. This proposal will
help to reduce vehicle speeds on residential roads, making it safer for all, in particular the
more vulnerable road users.

Consultation Details:
1. As this is a technical process, no consultation has taken place or would take place on the
overall approach or on a street-by-street basis. However, part of the monitoring of the
programme will include reviewing local concerns raised by local Councillors and residents
where the centrelines have not been reinstated in year 1.

Background Documents:

1. Corporate Strategy
2. Contribution to cycle safety of centre line removal on 20 mph and 30 mph speed limit roads
- Adrian Davis, Alan Tapp, Stella Warren, Bristol Business School, Faculty of Business &
Law, 2019
3. Influence of road markings, lane widths and driver behaviour on proximity and speed of
vehicles overtaking cyclists - Stella C. Shackel, John Parkin 2014

Revenue £0 Source of Revenue N/A
Cost Funding
Capital Cost £0 Source of Capital N/A
Funding
One off cost ☐ Ongoing Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving? New
cost ☐ OR Income generation proposal ☐

Professional comments section:

1. Finance Advice: This report requests approval to not reinstate centreline road markings
post resurfacing programmes on residential streets with 20mph speed limit unless there is
a specific road safety concern. This will generate a very small saving, less than £1k
citywide per annum, to the council from reduced use of materials.
Finance Business Partner: Ben Hegarty, Finance Business Partner Growth and
Regeneration, 4 August 2025.

2. Legal Advice: The use of centre lines is not an absolute requirement. For residential roads,
the Department for Transport’s guidance ‘Manual for Streets’ advises that there is some
evidence that, in appropriate circumstances, the absence of white lines can encourage
drivers to use lower speeds. It will therefore depend on a case-by-case basis, whether centre
lines should be used for safety reasons.

3. Legal Team Leader: Dawn Bodill – Specialist Solicitor – 29 September 2025

4. Implications on IT: I can see no implications on IT regarding this activity.

IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead Enterprise Architect – 31 July 2025

5. HR Advice: There are no HR implications evident
Template approved March 25
Page 186
OFFICIAL
HR Partner: Celia Williams, HR Business Partner, 31 July 2025

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Process to be followed YES

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) YES

Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment NO

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

Template approved March 25
Page 187
OFFICIAL
Appendix A: Centreline Reinstatement Policy

Background

The City Council has adopted a Safe Systems Approach to Road Safety where all elements of the road
system should work together to minimise the chance of a crash, and in the event of a crash, to
prevent someone being killed or seriously injured.

One of the key approaches in the Safe Systems Approach to Road Safety is ‘safe speeds’ reflecting
research that a reduction in speed helps to reduce the severity and volume of collisions. Therefore,
opportunities are sought to encourage lower speeds through road safety interventions and other
highway projects and workstreams.

Research has shown that motorists tend to slow down when a centreline is absent in certain
circumstances as they are not sure of their positioning on the road. This has also shown that this has
not led to a corresponding increase in collisions overall on slower residential roads.

Therefore, centrelines are no longer provided as a standard in the design of many new residential
neighbourhoods and as part of new highway schemes unless considered necessary.

It was identified that the resurfacing and surface dressing programmes provided an opportunity to
take the same approach on existing roads by only reinstating centrelines where they were
considered necessary. The idea was that this would help to reduce speeds and the severity of
collisions on these routes, as well as reducing the costs of maintaining these lines over future years.

After careful consideration and discussion with a variety of disciplines within Transport and Urban
Design teams, the Council’s Quality Assurance process recommended that road centrelines would
not be reinstated following resurfacing or surface dressing of 20mph roads unless, following a case-
by-case review, they were deemed essential to maintaining safety along the route.

Therefore, it was agreed that the presumption would be that centrelines would not be reinstated
following resurfacing on 20mph residential roads, unless such a review considered they were critical
to the safety of that section of road.

Current status

The process for achieving this involves two separate teams, Highways Maintenance to put the
surfacing programmes together and deliver any changes agreed and Road Safety to review the
programmes and recommend where road centrelines should or should not be reinstated. Both
teams are then involved in handling complaints from residents and Councillors concerned about
road safety in the absence of these road markings following both programmes.

Therefore, the overall process requires significant resources from both teams to ensure that the final
layout, with or without centrelines, is safe for all users. Over the last few years, both teams have
been stretched for resources and therefore have not been able to prioritise this process. As such,
rather than leave roads with a higher risk of collisions without centrelines, the process has resorted
back to Highway Maintenance reinstating the centrelines like for like.

In response to a question at Member Forum in March 2024, Highways stated that:

Page 188
“When we resurface roads, including preventive maintenance such as surface dressing and micro
asphalt, we reinstate lines on a like for like basis. If there are places that they have not been
reinstated, please give us more information so we can follow up.”

Challenges

Reviewing each section of road due for resurfacing, redesigning the road markings and marking out
and supervising the work adds about 2-3 hours per site shared across both of the teams involved.
Both of the teams have found it difficult to resource this in in recent years given other priorities at
the time of the year when this work needs to be undertaken to fit into the annual programme.

The Highway Maintenance Engineers rely on the Traffic Engineers in the Local Transport teams to
design any changes to the road markings in line with the requirements and specifications within the
Traffic Signs Regulations and General Directions (TSRGD). Therefore, in the absence of a design, the
contractor is instructed to install a like for like replacement.

The scheduling of resurfacing programmes and the subsequent relining of roads post resurfacing is
difficult to coordinate, given the need to fit into contractors’ programmes and the time of year this
has to take place. Therefore, there is limited opportunity to take the time required to review the
surfacing programmes, or to reconsider once the initial surface dressing and relining programmes
have been completed.

The overall concept of improving safety by removing road centrelines is a difficult one for people not
working in the field to contemplate and so concerns and complaints will also be received when
centrelines are not reinstated following resurfacing work.

Opportunities

Removing centrelines is technically straight forward to do when roads are resurfaced through
routine maintenance and can provide an initial saving in capital and reduces future maintenance
costs.

The QA process offers the opportunity for a Safe Systems Approach to be taken and for elements
like this to be identified and for changes to be easily made after the new road surface has been laid
to improve road safety as part of a joined-up approach. The highways maintenance team now work
on a 2 year programme for delivery. 1st year undertaking assessment and structural repairs. The 2nd
year delivers the final preventative treatment. Therefore, the surfacing programmes can be
circulated with sufficient time for the Road Safety Team to review and advise accordingly, then these
opportunities could be realised at relatively little expense.

The newly established Road Safety Team now have additional resources and are able to review these
programmes and provide appropriate advice to Highway Maintenance. Highway Maintenance teams
should likewise have sufficient skills and capacity to set out any changes on site and supervise the
contractor accordingly.

As the surfacing programmes are annual programmes, the centreline reinstatement process can
move to a two-year programme post the annual resurfacing treatment, which could reduce the risks

Page 189
and challenges above. This would mean that in year 1, centrelines are only installed on those higher
risk roads where the road safety team identifies a need for them. These could be monitored over
the course of the next 12 months by the Road Safety Team and Highway Maintenance teams and if
concerns do become apparent or complaints are received, appropriate sections of centreline could
be reinstated in year 2 as part of the programme of road markings.

Proposed Process:

• Highway Maintenance, as programme/project manager, issue resurfacing programmes for
assessment to the Road Safety team and a programme for when any changes need to be
requested.
• Road Safety Team to review the programmes and attend, investigate sites if required on the
assumption that centrelines are not reinstated in full on 20mph roads and are only
reinstated where they address a particular concern such as head on collisions or collisions at
due to driver alignment.
• Road Safety Team to create a design drawing for Highway Maintenance for any roads where
centrelines are proposed to remain, clearly identifying the road marking layout to be
reinstated post resurfacing.
• Highway Maintenance provide the designs to the lining contractor, mark out and supervise
the work as part of the post resurfacing road marking programme for that year.
• Road Safety monitor the site for one year and Road Safety will provide Highway
Maintenance with a design drawing if any additional sections of centreline are deemed to be
required on safety grounds after that period.
• Highway Maintenance include these reinstated road centreline changes as part of its lining
reinstatement works across the city i.e. 1 year after the initial lining work.
• Any further changes after that point are delivered through the capital programme by the
appropriate team in City Transport.

Page 190
Equality Impact Assessment [version 2.12]

Title: Centre Line Policy
☒ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☒ New
☐ Other [please state] ☐ Already exists / review ☐ Changing
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Mark Sperduty
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Group Manager - Road Safety

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of an Equality Impact Assessment is to assist decision makers in understanding the impact of proposals
as part of their duties under the Equality Act 2010. Detailed guidance to support completion can be found here
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com).
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the process by someone with a good knowledge of the
proposal and service area, and sufficient influence over the proposal. It is good practice to take a team approach to
completing the equality impact assessment. Please contact the Equality and Inclusion Team early for advice and
feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Describe who it is aimed at and the intended aims /
outcomes. Where known also summarise the key actions you plan to undertake. Please use plain English, avoiding
jargon and acronyms. Equality Impact Assessments are viewed by a wide range of people including decision-makers
and the wider public.
The City Council intending on implementing a new approach to road safety by selectively removing road
centrelines on 20mph residential streets. This forms part of the wider Road Safety strategy, which aims to reduce
the risk and severity of collisions. Research shows that drivers tend to slow down when centrelines are absent,
and this has not led to an increase in crashes on slower roads. By not reinstating centrelines during resurfacing
unless deemed essential for safety, the Council hopes to encourage safer driving behaviour, improve road safety
outcomes, and reduce long-term maintenance costs.

1.2 Who will the proposal have the potential to affect?
☒ Bristol City Council workforce ☐ Service users ☒ The wider community
☐ Commissioned services ☒ City partners / Stakeholder organisations
Additional comments:

1.3 Will the proposal have an equality impact?
Could the proposal affect access levels of representation or participation in a service, or does it have the potential to
change e.g. quality of life: health, education, or standard of living etc.?
If ‘No’ explain why you are sure there will be no equality impact, then skip steps 2-4 and request review by Equality
and Inclusion Team.
If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment, or if you plan to complete the assessment at a later stage please state
this clearly here and request review by the Equality and Inclusion Team.

☐ Yes ☒ No [please select]

Page 191
OFFICIAL
The proposal to omit centrelines on 20mph residential roads is based on established road safety research and
aligns with the City Council’s Safe Systems Approach. This approach is designed to improve safety outcomes for all
road users, including vulnerable groups, by encouraging lower vehicle speeds and reducing the severity of
collisions.
Key points supporting the decision not to require an EqIA include:
• Universal Safety Benefit: The intervention is intended to reduce speeds and improve safety for all road
users, regardless of age, disability, or background. It does not target or disadvantage any specific group.
• Evidence-Based Design: Research shows that removing centrelines in low-speed environments can lead to
more cautious driving without increasing collision rates. This supports the idea that the change is
beneficial across the board.
• Case-by-Case Review: The Council has committed to reviewing each road individually. Centrelines will still
be reinstated where they are deemed essential for safety, ensuring that specific needs (e.g. visibility,
layout complexity) are considered.
• Low-Risk Context: The proposal applies only to 20mph residential roads, which are already designed to
be low-speed, low-risk environments. These roads typically have lower traffic volumes and fewer complex
manoeuvres, reducing the likelihood of disproportionate impacts.
• No Change to Access or Services: The proposal does not affect access to services, infrastructure, or public
transport, nor does it introduce physical barriers or restrictions that could impact protected groups.

Step 5: Review
The Equality and Inclusion Team need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your EqIA. EqIAs
should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers on the equalities
impact of the proposal. Please seek feedback and review from the Equality and Inclusion Team before requesting
sign off from your Director1.
Equality and Inclusion Team Review: Director Sign-Off: Alex Hearn
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

Date: 2/10/25 Date: 06/10/2025

1 Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.

Page 192
OFFICIAL
Environmental Impact Assessment [version 1.0]

Proposal title: Centre Line Policy
Project stage and type: ☐ Initial Idea Mandate ☐ Outline Business Case ☐ Full Business Case
☒ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☒ New ☐ Changing
☐ Other [please state] ☐ Already exists / review
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Mark Sperduty
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Group Manager – Road Safety

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of this Environmental Impact Assessment is to help you develop your proposal in a way that is
compliant with the council’s policies and supports the council’s strategic objectives under the One City Climate
Strategy, the One City Ecological Emergency Strategy and the latest Corporate Strategy.
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the project proposal process by someone with a good
knowledge of the project, the service area that will deliver it, and sufficient influence over the proposal to make
changes as needed.
It is good practice to take a team approach to completing the Environmental Impact Assessment. See further
guidance on completing this document. Please email environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk early for advice
and feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Please use plain English, avoiding jargon and
acronyms.
The City Council intending on implementing a new approach to road safety by not repainting road centrelines
when 20mph residential streets are resurfaced. This forms part of the wider Road Safety strategy, which aims to
reduce the risk and severity of collisions. Research shows that drivers tend to slow down when centrelines are
absent, and this has not led to an increase in crashes on slower roads. By not reinstating centrelines during
resurfacing unless deemed essential for safety, the Council hopes to encourage safer driving behaviour, improve
road safety outcomes, and reduce long-term maintenance costs.

1.2 Will the proposal have an environmental impact?
Could the proposal have either a positive or negative effects for the environment now or in the future? If ‘No’
explain why you are sure there will be no environmental impact, then skip steps 2-3 and request review by sending
this form to environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk

If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment.
☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

1.3 If the proposal is part of an options appraisal, has the environmental impact of each option
been assessed and included in the recommendation-making process?
If ‘Yes’ please ensure that the details of the environmental impacts of each option are made clear in the pros and
cons section of the project management options appraisal document.

☒ Yes ☐ No ☐ Not applicable [please select]

Page 193
OFFICIAL
If ‘No’ explain why environmental impacts have not been considered as part of the options appraisal process.

Step 2: What kinds of environmental impacts might the project have?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying
potential impacts.

Does the proposal create any benefits for the environment, or have any adverse impacts?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our corporate environmental objectives and the wider One City Climate and Ecological Emergency
strategies.
Consider how the proposal creates environmental impacts in the following categories, both now and in the future.
Reasonable efforts should be made to quantify stated benefit or adverse impacts wherever possible.

Where the proposal is likely to have a beneficial impact, consider what actions would enhance those impacts. Where
the proposal is likely to have a harmful impact, consider whether actions would mitigate these impacts.

Enhancements or mitigation actions are only required when there is a likely impact identified. Remember that where
enhancements or mitigation actions are listed, they should be assigned to staff and appropriately resourced.

GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many categories)

ENV1 Carbon neutral: There is no definitive evidence that driving at or below 20mph, or
Emissions of climate 20mph speed limits reduce greenhouse gas emissions, since petrol
changing gases and diesel engines are not designed to be operating at their greatest
efficiency at that speed. That said, lower speeds encourage smoother
BCC has committed to Benefits acceleration and braking, so Edinburgh City Council considers
achieving net zero emissions emissions reductions to be possible. Since removing centre lines
for its direct activities by encourage a reduction in speed, there is the possibility of a small
2025, and to support the city reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
in achieving net zero by
2030.

Will the proposal involve
transport, or the use of Enhancing
energy in buildings? Will the actions
proposal involve the
purchase of goods or
services? If the answer is yes
to either of these questions, Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years
there will be a carbon
impact.
Adverse
Consider the scale and impacts
timeframe of the impact,
particularly if the proposal

Page 194
OFFICIAL
will lead to ongoing
emissions beyond the 2025
and 2030 target dates.
Mitigating
actions
Further guidance
☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

ENV2 Ecological recovery:
Wildlife and habitats
BCC has committed to 30%
Benefits
of its land being managed
for nature and to halve its
use of pesticides by 2030.

Consider how your proposal
can support increased space Enhancing
for nature, reduced use of actions
pesticides, reduce pollution
to waterways, and reduce
consumption of products Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
that undermine ecosystems
around the world.
Adverse
If your proposal will directly impacts
lead to a reduction in habitat
within Bristol, then consider
how your proposed
mitigation can lead to a
biodiversity net gain. Be sure
to refer to quantifiable Mitigating
changes wherever possible. actions

Further guidance
☒ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

The centre line policy would remove the centre line where not
necessary for Road Safety on 20mph roads this means less
ENV3 A cleaner, low-waste
thermoplastic screed would be used as part of resurfacing works.
city: Consumption of
resources and generation of Benefits
Since removing centre lines encourage a reduction in speed, which in
waste
turn reduces the number and severity of road traffic accidents, it is
likely that this policy will reduce the waste and resources used to
clean up and repair vehicles that have been in accidents.
Consider what resources will
be used as a result of the
Enhancing
proposal, how they can be
actions
minimised or swapped for
less impactful ones, where
they will be sourced from,
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years

Page 195
OFFICIAL
and what will happen to any
waste generated
Adverse
impacts

Further guidance Mitigating
actions
☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

ENV4 Climate resilience:
Bristol’s resilience to the Benefits
effects of climate change

Bristol’s climate is already
changing, and increasingly
frequent instances of
extreme weather will Enhancing
become more likely over actions
time.

Consider how the proposal
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
will perform during periods
of extreme weather
(particularly heat and
Adverse
flooding).
impacts

Consider if the proposal will
reduce or increase risk to
people and assets during
extreme weather events.
Mitigating
actions
Further guidance
☒ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Since removing centre lines encourage a reduction in speed and lower
speeds encourage smoother acceleration and braking, there is likely
Statutory duty:
Benefits to be an improvement in air quality through reduced particulate
Prevention of Pollution to
emissions from brakes and tyres (even from electric vehicles) and
air, water, or land
some reduction in exhaust emissions.

Enhancing
Consider how the proposal actions
will change the likelihood of
pollution occurring to air,
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☒ 5+ years

Page 196
OFFICIAL
water, or land and what
steps will be taken to
Adverse
prevent pollution occurring. impacts

Mitigating
Further guidance actions

☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Step 3: Action Plan
Use this section summarise and assign responsibility for any actions you have identified to improve data, enhance
beneficial, or mitigate negative impacts. Actions identified in section two can be grouped together if named
responsibility is under the same person.
This action plan should be updated at each stage of the project. Please be aware that the Sustainable City and
Climate Change Service may use this action plan as an audit checklist during the project’s implementation or
operation.
Enhancing / mitigating action required Responsible Officer Timescale

Step 4: Review
The Sustainable City and Climate Change Service need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your
impact assessment. Assessments should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for
decision-makers on the environmental impact of the proposal.
Please seek feedback and review by emailing environmental.performance@bristol.gov.uk before final submission of
your decision pathway documentation1.
Where impacts identified in this assessment are deemed significant, they will be summarised here by the Sustainable
City and Climate Change Service and must be included in the ‘evidence base’ section of the decision pathway cover
sheet.

Summary of significant beneficial impacts and opportunities to support the Climate, Ecological and Corporate
Strategies (ENV1,2,3,4):

Summary of significant adverse impacts and how they can be mitigated:

1 Review by the Sustainable City and Climate Change Service confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers
to consider the likely environmental impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.
Page 197
OFFICIAL
Environmental Performance Team Reviewer: Submitting author:
Giles Liddell, Environmental Performance Co-ordinator Mark Sperduty, Group Manager – Road Safety

Date: Date:
02/10/2025 6/10/2025

Page 198
OFFICIAL
Agenda Item 12

Committee Report

KEY DECISION OR FOR INFORMATION: Key decision over £500k

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 23 October 2025

TITLE: Vehicle Towing Contract

Ward(s): Citywide

Officer presenting the report: Shaun Taylor Job title: Head of Highways

Committee Chair: Councillor Ed Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: BCC Staff

Purpose of Report:

1. To seek approval to reprocure the Highway Maintenance Vehicle Towing Contract. The
contract is essential to gain site possession to carryout Statutory Highway Maintenance
and other related works in Bristol’s busy urban environment. The towing contractor
removes parked vehicles which remain in place despite advanced notification of the work,
and places them in a neighbouring street.

2. To reprocure the contract for a longer period of time, i.e. 5 years. A longer contract will
encourage contractors to invest in a more modern fleet and equipment, as our current
supplier uses some older vehicles, some of which are not CAZ compliant. Car lifting
equipment can also be old, which is slow to operate, so having a knock-on effect on
clearing sites and allowing maintenance work to proceed.

Evidence Base

1. Full site possession is often required to allow for Highway Maintenance works to take
place, including carriageway patching works, carriageway preventive maintenance
including surface dressing and micro asphalt, and surfacing works. The contract is also
used by other teams including Parks for when they pollard street trees.

2. Despite advanced notification of works, which includes street signage and letter drops, we
still encounter parked vehicles, which would prevent works from proceeding without the
ability to move them. The problem is more challenging in central and highly populated
areas, where on street parking is in high demand.

3. The contractor will be required to notify BCC Parking Services, BCC Customer Services
and the Police regarding the location of each vehicle moved, so that owners can locate
their vehicles.
Template approved March 25
Page 199
OFFICIAL
4. When undertaking preventative and surfacing programs, it is important to cover the entire
footprint of the road or footway as leaving patches for parked cars would require officers
returning at a later date to undertake more expensive repairs. This was previously
estimated at over ten times the cost of moving a vehicle.

Alternative options considered:

1. The only other option would be not to move parked vehicles and either work around them,
missing areas where vehicles are parked or postpone or cancel the works. It is often not
possible to work around parked vehicles, as the remaining road width may not be sufficient
to allow for safe systems of working. It would not be possible to carryout out some
surfacing works without a site which is totally clear of parked vehicles. Postponing and or
cancelling works may result in a compensation event, where contractors claim their costs
for losses incurred.

2. Option to join with the parking services contract was considered but the contracts work
under different legislation and contracts as the parking services contract is a concession
contract at no cost to the council under Traffic Regulations and the Highways contract is at
our cost and under Highways Act.

Officer Recommendations:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity

1. Authorises the Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration in consultation with Chair
of the Transport and Connectivity Committee to re-procure and award the Vehicle
Towing Contract, in-line with the procurement routes and maximum budget envelopes
outlined in this report being £1million over 5 years.
2. Authorises the Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration in consultation with Chair
of the Transport and Connectivity Committee to invoke any subsequent
extensions/variations specifically defined in the contract(s) being awarded, up to the
maximum budget envelope outlined in this report.

Corporate Strategy alignment:

1. This brief aligns with the Corporate Strategy, including its Vision to “create a sustainable
and equitable Bristol that enables everyone to be safe, well and thrive”, and in particular
priority 4 “Making it easier, greener and safer to travel into and around Bristol” and
objective 3 “Maintain essential city infrastructure for safety, longevity and accessibility.”

City Benefits:

1. The contract facilitates Highway Maintenance works, allowing them to take place in a safe
and controlled environment. The subsequent works ensure that the highway is maintained
to a safe and reasonable standard. This offers a clear benefit to residents, the travelling
public, businesses and the transportation of goods.

Consultation Details:

1. As this is a contract to facilitate other works, forming part of the Council’s statutory duty to
maintain the highway, no consultation has taken place.
Template approved March 25
Page 200
OFFICIAL
Background Documents:

1. Corporate Strategy

Revenue £ Source of Revenue
Cost Funding
Capital Cost £1,000,000 Source of Capital CRSTS Maintenance block
Over 5 years Funding
One off cost ☐ Ongoing Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving?
cost ☒ Choose an item.
OR Income generation proposal ☐

Professional comments section:

1. Finance Advice: The report is seeking approval to reprocure a longer contract period for
the Highway Maintenance Vehicle Towing Contract. The procurement of the contract will
need to follow the legal and procurement advice contained within this report.

Currently spend is c. £0.2 million a year on this contract, so over a five-year term, the total
cost would be around £1 million.

A significant portion of the contract funding is secured from various capital programmes
within Traffic & Highways and a few other departments such as Parks. The costs form part
of the capital surfacing programs on carriageways and footways, with the funding coming
from the City Region Sustainable Transport Settlement (CRSTS) maintenance block.

Regular monitoring and reporting of key performance indicators (KPI’s) and capital
spending forecasts will allow early identification of cost pressures or performance issues,
so action can be taken quickly, and risks managed.

A longer contract will need to include provision for periodic reviews of pricing to reflect
market conditions, reducing the risk of financial strain due to inflation or cost fluctuations.
Any increases in costs will need to be swiftly identified and mitigated so the service stays
within its budget envelope.

Finance Business Partner: Ben Hegarty, Finance Business Partner Growth and
Regeneration, 12 September 2025.

2. Legal Advice: The procurement process must be conducted in line with the Procurement
Act 2023 and the Councils own procurement rules. Legal services will advise and assist
officers with regard to the conduct of the procurement process and the resulting contractual
arrangements.

Legal Team Leader: Husinara Jones, Team Manager/Solicitor 11 August 2025

3. Implications on IT: I can see no implications on IT regarding this activity.
Template approved March 25
Page 201
OFFICIAL
IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead enterprise Architect – 6 August 2025

4. HR Advice: There are no HR implications evident

5. HR Partner: Celia Williams, HR Business Partner, 25 September 2025

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal NO

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) YES

Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment NO

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

Template approved March 25
Page 202
OFFICIAL
Equality Impact Assessment [version 3.1]

Refer to EqIA Step by Step Guide for advice on completing this assessment
Title: Vehicle Towing Contract
Type of proposal: Service Status: New
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Philip Davies
Service Area: Highways Lead Officer role: Philip Davies

Step 1: What do we want to do?

What is the purpose of the proposal?
To reprocure our vehicle Towing Contract (on as Street to Street basis), as the current contract is coming
to an end. The new contract is for 5 years.

As part of the procurement quality scoring assessment, providers will be required to demonstrate a good
understanding of Equality Act 2010 requirements and the public sector equality duty; including that
equality of opportunity is central to internal processes / workforce; and services will be regularly tailored
and reviewed to meet the diverse needs of Bristol citizens.

Who will be affected?
☒ Bristol City Council workforce ☐ Service users ☒ The wider community
☐ Commissioned services ☐ City partners / Stakeholder organisations

Will the proposal have an equality impact?
☐ Yes ☒ No
If ‘Yes’ complete steps 2-4 below. If ‘No’ explain how you know there will be no equality impact:
This proposal will not affect how people access or participate in a service, or change aspects like health,
education, or quality of life. This is to procure a contact only, to enable us (Highway Maintenance) to
gain site possession, to carryout highway maintenance works, ie to clear roads of any remaining parked
vehicles, which remain despite placing No Parking cones, site signage and letter dropping affected
properties.

Step 5: Review
Equality and Inclusion Team Review Director Sign-Off:
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

Date: 15/09/2025 Date: 15/09/2025

Page 203
Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.

Page 204
Environmental Impact Assessment [version 1.1]

Proposal title: Vehicle Towing Contract
Project stage and type: ☒ Initial Idea Mandate ☐ Outline Business Case ☐ Full Business Case
☐ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☒ Service ☐ New ☐ Changing
☐ Other [please state] ☒ Already exists / review
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Philip Davies
Service Area: Highways Lead Officer role: Philip Davies

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of this Environmental Impact Assessment is to help you develop your proposal in a way that is
compliant with the council’s policies and supports the council’s strategic objectives under the One City Climate
Strategy, the One City Ecological Emergency Strategy and the latest Corporate Strategy.
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the project proposal process by someone with a good
knowledge of the project, the service area that will deliver it, and sufficient influence over the proposal to make
changes as needed.
It is good practice to take a team approach to completing the Environmental Impact Assessment. See further
guidance on completing this document. Please contact the Environmental Performance Team early for advice and
feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Please use plain English, avoiding jargon and
acronyms.
To reprocure the Highway Maintenance Vehicle Towing Contract. The contract is essential to gain site possession
to carryout Statutory Highway Maintenance and other related works in Bristol’s busy urban environment. The
towing contractor removes parked vehicles which remain in place despite advanced notification of the work,
and places them in a neighbouring street.

1.2 Will the proposal have an environmental impact?
Could the proposal have either a positive or negative effects for the environment now or in the future? If ‘No’
explain why you are sure there will be no environmental impact, then skip steps 2-3 and request review by the
Environmental Performance Team.

If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment.
☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

1.3 If the proposal is part of an options appraisal, has the environmental impact of each option
been assessed and included in the recommendation-making process?
If ‘Yes’ please ensure that the details of the environmental impacts of each option are made clear in the pros and
cons section of the project management options appraisal document.

☐ Yes ☐ No ☒ Not applicable [please select]

If ‘No’ explain why environmental impacts have not been considered as part of the options appraisal process.

Page 205
Step 2: What kinds of environmental impacts might the project have?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying
potential impacts.
2.1 Does the proposal create any benefits for the environment, or have any adverse impacts?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our corporate environmental objectives and the wider One City Climate and Ecological Emergency strategies.
Consider how the proposal creates environmental impacts in the following categories, both now and in the future.
Reasonable efforts should be made to quantify stated benefit or adverse impacts wherever possible.

Where the proposal is likely to have a beneficial impact, consider what actions would enhance those impacts. Where
the proposal is likely to have a harmful impact, consider whether actions would mitigate these impacts.

Enhancements or mitigation actions are only required when there is a likely impact identified. Remember that where
enhancements or mitigation actions are listed, they should be assigned to staff and appropriately resourced.

GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many categories)
Baseline activity data for the existing contract is not available and it is therefore not possible to quantify existing
impacts.

ENV1 Carbon neutral: None identified
Emissions of climate
changing gases
Benefits
BCC has committed to
achieving net zero emissions
for its direct activities by
2025, and to support the city
in achieving a Just Transition N/A
to net zero by 2030.

Will the proposal involve Enhancing
transport, or the use of actions
energy in buildings? Will the
proposal involve the
purchase of goods or
services? If the answer is yes Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
to either of these questions, Carbon emissions associated with fuel used in delivering the contract,
there will be a carbon though estimated to be relatively minor in extent.
impact.
Adverse
impacts
Consider the scale and
timeframe of the impact,
particularly if the proposal
will lead to ongoing Contract manager to seek annual performance reports as part of the
emissions beyond the 2025 new contract, showing number of vehicles lifts / movements made.
Mitigating
and 2030 target dates. actions

Further guidance
☐ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Page 206
ENV2 Ecological recovery:
Wildlife and habitats
BCC has committed to 30%
of its land being managed Benefits
for nature and to halve its
use of pesticides by 2030.

Consider how your proposal
can support increased space
for nature, reduced use of Enhancing
pesticides, reduce pollution actions
to waterways, and reduce
consumption of products
that undermine ecosystems Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
around the world.

If your proposal will directly Adverse
lead to a reduction in habitat impacts
within Bristol, then consider
how your proposed
mitigation can lead to a
biodiversity net gain. Be sure
to refer to quantifiable Mitigating
changes wherever possible. actions

Further guidance
☒ No impact Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

ENV3 A cleaner, low-waste
city: Consumption of Benefits
resources and generation of
waste

Consider what resources will Enhancing
be used as a result of the actions
proposal, how they can be
minimised or swapped for
less impactful ones, where Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
they will be sourced from,
and what will happen to any
waste generated Adverse
impacts

Mitigating
Further guidance actions

☒ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Page 207
ENV4 Climate resilience:
Bristol’s resilience to the
effects of climate change Benefits

Bristol’s climate is already
changing, and increasingly
frequent instances of
extreme weather will Enhancing
become more likely over actions
time.
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
Consider how the proposal
will perform during periods
of extreme weather
Adverse
(particularly heat and
impacts
flooding).

Consider if the proposal will
reduce or increase risk to
people and assets during
extreme weather events. Mitigating
actions
Further guidance
☒ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Re-procurement on a longer term creates enhanced opportunity to
seek providers with Clean Air Zone compliant fleets.
Statutory duty: Benefits
Prevention of Pollution to
air, water, or land
Contract requirements to include preference for Euro6 / Clean Air
Zone compliant vehicles to be used in delivery of the contract.
Enhancing
actions
Consider how the proposal
will change the likelihood of
pollution occurring to air, Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☒ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years
water, or land and what None identified
steps will be taken to Adverse
prevent pollution occurring. impacts

N/A
Mitigating
Further guidance actions

☐ No impact
Persistence of effects: ☐ 1 year or less ☐ 1 – 5 years ☐ 5+ years

Step 3: Actions
3.1 Action Plan
Use this section summarise and assign responsibility for any actions you have identified to improve data, enhance
beneficial, or mitigate negative impacts. Actions identified in section two can be grouped together if named
responsibility is under the same person.
Page 208
This action plan should be updated at each stage of the project. Please be aware that the Sustainable City and
Climate Change Service may use this action plan as an audit checklist during the project’s implementation or
operation.
Enhancing / mitigating action required Responsible Officer Timescale
Contract manager to seek annual performance reports as part of Philip Davies 31/12/2026
the new contract, showing number of vehicles lifts / movements
made.
Contract requirements to include preference for Euro6 / Clean Air Philip Davies 31/10/2025
Zone compliant vehicles to be used in delivery of the contract.

Step 4: Review – for completion by the Environmental Performance Team
The Sustainable City and Climate Change Service need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your
impact assessment. Assessments should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for
decision-makers on the environmental impact of the proposal. Please seek feedback and review from the
Environmental Performance Team before final submission of your decision pathway documentation1.
Where impacts identified in this assessment are deemed significant, they will be summarised here and included on
the cover sheet of the decision pathway documentation.

Summary of significant beneficial impacts and opportunities to support the Climate, Ecological and Corporate
Strategies (ENV1,2,3,4):
BCC’s Environmental Impact Assessment has determined significant beneficial impacts from the proposal:
N/A
Summary of significant adverse impacts and how they can be mitigated:
BCC’s Environmental Impact Assessment has determined significant adverse impacts from the proposal:
N/A

Environmental Performance Team Reviewer: Submitting author: Philip Davies

Daniel Shelton
Date: Date: 26th August 2025
22nd September 2025

1 Review by the Environmental Performance Team confirms there is sufficient information for decision makers to
consider the most relevant environmental impacts at the current stage of the proposal. This is not an endorsement
or approval of the proposal. Page 209
Agenda Item 13

Committee Report

KEY DECISION OR FOR INFORMATION: For Information

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 23 October 2025

TITLE: Workplace Parking Levy Update

Ward(s): Citywide

Officer presenting the report: Adam Crowther Job title: Head of City Transport

Committee Chair: Ed Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: Committee Chair

Purpose of Report: To update the committee on progress with the Workplace Parking Levy
Outline Business Case (OBC) and to outline progress on key project milestones.

Evidence Base:

1. In September 2024, the Transport and Connectivity Committee approved to spend up to
£1million on the Stage One development of a Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) project
including preparation of an OBC. In May 2025, an update report was brought to the
Committee to provide an overview of the planned key project milestones. It was agreed
that a report would be brought back to committee once key project milestones were met.

2. A WPL forms a potential part of Bristol City Council’s transport strategy and is outlined in
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 and the Bristol Transport Strategy as a key demand
management measure aimed at tackling congestion, particularly at peak times, and as a
means of providing significant additional revenue for transport improvements across the
city. The introduction of a WPL would help discourage car commuting and help increase
the use of alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public transport which would in
turn, improve people’s health and the local environment and can free up land for more
productive use.

3. There are three main stages to the development of a WPL scheme which are outlined
below. An estimated timescale is provided to indicate how long it should take to complete
each stage.

Template approved March 25
Page 210
OFFICIAL
Stage Timescale
Outline Business Case April 2025 – April 2026 (1 year)
Public Consultation, Full Business Case May 2026 – December 2027 (1 year to 18
and Scheme Approval to Secretary of months)
State for Transport
Implementation and Operation January 2028 – December 2029 (1-2
years)

4. The Stage One programme which is currently underway, is split into five key workstreams,
with a planned end date for all workstreams by April 2026. The timescales for some tasks
have shifted since last reported in May 2025 due to procurement and contractual issues
associated with appointing a consultant to assist with the project. However, the work is still
set to conclude by April 2026.

Stage Original timescale Revised date

1. Supporting studies April to June 2025 April to Sept 2025
and information
2. Surveys and data June to September 2025 October to November
collection 2025
3. Modelling, September to November November to January
forecasting and 2025 2026
impact assessment
4. WPL scheme October to March 2026 November to March
development 2026
5. WPL package and December to April 2026 January to April 2026
final OBC

5. In stage 2, data will be gathered about existing businesses in Bristol, as well as
employment projections for allocated growth sites, and this will be used to estimate the
number of potentially liable Workplace Parking Places (WPPs) that might be included in a
WPL scheme for the city. Initial engagement will take place with employer representative
groups to gather their input on the approach being taken in subsequent stages of the
project, such as the geographical areas in scope for the modelling.

6. The data gathered in stage 2 will be used to undertake the modelling, forecasting and
impact assessments in stage 3. This work will help to forecast potential revenue to be
generated by the scheme, as well as identifying other likely impacts on factors such as
congestion, air quality and economic outcomes.

7. At the end of the stage 4 workstream, a draft scheme definition will be put forward, which
will include the potential boundaries of the scheme, proposed charge, parking space
thresholds, possible exemptions and hours of operation. Engagement will take place with
key employer representative groups in this stage, following on from initial engagement in
earlier stages of the project. Wider public consultation is not typically undertaken for a
WPL project at the OBC stage.

8. In terms of progress to date, the Project Team has been formed and worked has started on
the Strategic Case for the OBC. Supporting data and information has been collated for the
OBC, and to assist with the planned modelling and forecasting work. This includes datasets
Template approved March 25
Page 211
OFFICIAL
on air quality, congestion, carbon emissions, existing public parking stock, travel to work
patterns and employment statistics.

9. A competitive tendering exercise has been completed to appoint a consultant to assist with
the project. Five consultants were invited to tender, and two consultants submitted a bid.
Systra have been awarded the work, and an inception meeting was held with them on 17th
September 2025.

10. We have officially engaged Nottingham City Council to provide expert advice and act as a
critical friend to help guide the project with us. To date they have contributed to the
development of the project plan, the preparation and evaluation of the tender
documentation, the initial communications and marketing strategy, and stakeholder
management. Officers and some committee members will be undertaking a study visit to
Nottingham late October to learn more about their WPL scheme and the benefits it has
brought to the city.

11. The Communications Team at BCC is engaged and are currently drawing up a
Communications Plan for the project. This will be firmed up once the consultant has
confirmed when the workplace surveys are likely to commence.

12. In terms of current and forecast spend, approximately £100k is allocated to be spent on the
project in 2025/26.

Alternative options considered:

No alternative options are currently recommended as the approach is in line with advice
received from Nottingham City Council who are the only local authority in the country to
successfully implement at WPL so far.

When the project comes to committee for approval at subsequent stages of the programme,
different options will be presented from the modelling.

Officer Recommendations:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity notes this update report.

Corporate Strategy alignment:

1. Children and young people - improved access to transport schemes and initiatives will
help ensure all children and young people have a good start in life.
2. Economy and skills – the scheme will help tackle congestion which can have a significant
negative impact on economic growth. Revenue from a WPL scheme will help ensure
people have improved access to jobs, skills and training.
3. Environment and sustainability – the scheme will help reduce congestion and in turn will
work towards BCC carbon and air quality ambitions. It will also contribute to BCC climate
and ecological emergencies.
4. Healthcare and wellbeing – the scheme will help tackle health inequalities by providing
people with improved access to a range of sustainable transport opportunities such as
walking and cycling that will help improve their health and wellbeing.
5. Homes and communities – the scheme can help increase revenue towards transport
schemes that can provide more healthy, resilient and inclusive neighbourhoods.
Template approved March 25
Page 212
OFFICIAL
6. Transport and connectivity – a WPL can enable investment in a more reliable,
convenient and safer network of public transport and infrastructure for walking and cycling.
7. Effective development organisation – the project aligns with our One City approach of
working with our partners to deliver long-term ambitions for the city.

City Benefits:

1. The introduction of a WPL has benefits associated with a reduction in car use and a
subsequent increase in the use of alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public
transport. In turn this will have a positive impact on people’s health.
2. A reduction in car trips into the city centre is likely to result in a reduction in the amount of
carbon emissions.
3. A reduction in the number of car trips will have a beneficial impact on air quality.
4. Improved air quality and a reduction in traffic noise will have a beneficial impact on health.
5. A reduction in car-based trips will help reduce congestion and the negative impacts
associated with this such as delays and the negative impact this has on economic growth.
6. The greatest potential benefit will be through the transport measures/schemes that can be
funded through the revenue raised by a WPL. The revenue should be substantial,
predictable and locally generated and will significantly help BCC to develop and deliver
transport infrastructure and initiatives in the longer term.
7. The additional revenue generated could fund more sustainable transport options which are
particularly beneficial to younger, older people and disabled people who tend to have more
limited access to a car and rely more on public transport to access key services such as
education and healthcare.

Consultation Details:

1. A WPL is referenced in and consulted on as part of Joint Local Transport Plan 4 and the
Bristol Transport Strategy.
2. A Stakeholder Management Strategy and accompanying Communications Plan form a key
part of the Stage One work.
3. A Stakeholder Radar has already been produced as part of the Feasibility Study undertaken
by Nottingham CC; this outlines those stakeholders who will be both vital and necessary to
engage and consult with as part of the programme. Further information on this is outlined
from page 38 onwards of the Feasibility Study (see Appendix A).
4. Following approval of this report, a more detailed project plan will be produced which will
further outline the stages at which consultation will take place throughout the programme.
5. Formal public consultation is proposed as part of Stage Two of the WPL project if it
progresses beyond the OBC stage.
6. Further updates will be brought to the Transport Connectivity Committee as the project
progresses.
7. At the end of the Stage One programme, a proposal will be brought back to the Transport
and Connectivity Policy Committee for approval and to progress to the next stage.

Background Documents:
1. Appendix A: Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol – Final Draft.
2. 12 September 2024 Transport and Connectivity Committee Workplace Parking Levy report
3. 15 May 2025 Transport and Connectivity Committee Workplace Parking Levy report

Revenue £ 1million Source of Revenue Clean Air Zone fund
Cost Funding
Template approved March 25
Page 213
OFFICIAL
Capital Cost £ Source of Capital
Funding
One off cost ☐ Ongoing Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving? N/A
cost ☒ OR Income generation proposal ☐

Professional comments section:

1. Finance Advice: This report is providing an update on the development of a workplace
parking levy (WPL) within Bristol. The WPL is intended to reduce congestion, improve air
quality, and generate revenue for sustainable transport improvements. Previous approval
was given to use £1 million of CAZ funding to develop this scheme and this is captured within
CAZ funding monitoring. It is anticipated that the levy will replenish the CAZ funding pot within
a few years of operation, however finance has not been provided with detail to support this.
To date, approximately £26,000 has been spent developing the levy and it is presumed that
most of the £1 million allocated will be spent within the 2026/27 financial year.

Future implementation will require IT systems to manage and enforce the levy. No systems
have yet been scoped, which could pose integration or cost risks later.
In addition, effective consultation is critical, especially given the potential impact on
employers and commuters. Reputational risk for the council, along with risk of public
resistance is high, if engagement is not well managed.

Finance Business Partner: Vivi Sargioti, Finance Business Partner - Growth &
Regeneration, 15 September 2025

2. Legal Advice: As this is an update report on progress towards the OBC there are no specific
legal implications arising from the report.

Legal Team Manager: Joanne Mansfield 11 September 2025

3. Implications on IT: There are likely to be I.T. systems needed to support and manage WPL.
I.T. are supportive of the proposal and can be engaged through the existing work request
process.

IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead Enterprise Architect – 10 September 2025

4. HR Advice: There are no HR implications evident

HR Partner: Celia Williams, HR Business Partner, 25 September 2025

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal YES

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) NO

Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment NO

Template approved March 25
Page 214
OFFICIAL
Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

Template approved March 25
Page 215
OFFICIAL
Feasibility Study Report for a WPL
Scheme in Bristol

Submission by Nottingham City Council on behalf of
Bristol City Council

Page 216
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |0
Table of Contents
Table of Contents ...................................................................................................................1
1.0 Foreword ...........................................................................................................................3
2.0 Executive Summary .........................................................................................................4
3.0 Background ......................................................................................................................5
4.0 Methodology .....................................................................................................................8
5.0 Deliverables ....................................................................................................................10
5.1 Key Stages and Activities..........................................................................................10
5.1.1 (WS1.0) Stage One: Scheme Development – Outline Business Case (OBC) ......11
5.1.2 (PM1.0) Stage One Project Management – Outputs .............................................15
5.1.3 (WS2.0) Stage Two: Public Consultation and Approval ........................................16
5.1.4 (PM2.0) Project Management – Outputs ...............................................................18
5.1.5 (WS3.0) Stage Three: Implementation and Operation ..........................................19
5.1.6 (PM3.0) Project Management – Outputs ...............................................................21
5.2 Milestones and External Dependencies ...................................................................23
5.3 Data Analysis and Quality Assurance of the Atkins Study ....................................26
5.3.1 Description of Methodology ...................................................................................26
5.3.2 Analysis/Critique ....................................................................................................27
5.3.3 Estimate on Potential Income ................................................................................29
5.4 Governance and Project Team Structure.................................................................32
5.4.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................32
5.4.2 Governance ...........................................................................................................32
5.4.3 Governance Team Structure .................................................................................33
5.4.4 WPL Project Team.................................................................................................33
5.4.5 Internal (Bristol City Council) WPL Project Team Structure ..................................34
5.4.6 External (non-Bristol City Council) Project Team Structure ...................................36
5.5 Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan ............................38
5.5.1 Stakeholder Management Strategy .......................................................................38
5.5.2 Communications Plan ............................................................................................42
5.5.3 Communications Responsibilities ..........................................................................45
5.6 Risk Analysis for Bristol City Council’s Readiness to Progress Ahead of Stage
One………………………………………………………………………………………………...47
5.6.1 Introduction to Project Risk Management ..............................................................47
5.6.2 What is Project Risk Management?.......................................................................47
5.6.3 Issue Management versus Risk Management.......................................................47
5.6.4 Opportunities and Threats .....................................................................................48
5.6.5 Risk Considerations in the Proposal and Approval Phase ....................................48

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page 217 Page |1
5.6.6 Project Risk Management Process........................................................................48
5.6.7 Methodology ..........................................................................................................48
5.6.8 Summary of Risk Analysis .....................................................................................50
6.0 Conclusion and Recommendations for Action ...........................................................52
7.0 Appendices.....................................................................................................................54
7.1 Appendix A: Bristol Key Terms Glossary ................................................................54
7.2 Appendix B: WPL Glossary .......................................................................................56
7.3 Appendix C: WPL Route Map ....................................................................................58
7.4 Appendix D: Milestones and Dependencies Timeline ............................................59
7.5 Appendix E: Timeline for a Bristol WPL Scheme ....................................................60
7.6 Appendix F: Governance and Project Team Structure ...........................................61
7.8 Appendix G: Stakeholder Radar ...............................................................................62
7.9 Appendix H: 2X2 Power/Influence by Interest in WPL Matrix ................................63
7.10 Appendix I: Risk Register ........................................................................................64
7.11 Appendix J: Recommendations..............................................................................72

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page 218 Page |2
1.0 Foreword

In March 2021, Nottingham City Council were asked by Bristol City Council to conduct
a Feasibility Study to assess their readiness to develop a Workplace Parking Levy
(WPL) scheme. I am pleased to offer this Feasibility Study Report as the result of that
agreement. Inside you will find a tailor-made WPL Route Map and a wealth of guidance
on implementing a cost effective, timely and low risk WPL scheme in Bristol.
Climate change is playing an ever-increasing part in decision making across society
and nowhere more so than in local government, with around 230 local authorities
declaring a climate crisis. Consequently, air quality and congestion are also coming
under greater public scrutiny and we are pleased that more councils across the UK
are considering implementing a WPL, as it is a proven way of constraining congestion
growth and providing the financial resources for a step change in sustainable
transport.
Bristol City Council have already shown strong leadership on sustainability with their
One City Plan and I am excited by the proposals the plan sets out, particularly in the
field of transport. Following the production of this Feasibility Study Report, I am sure
that a WPL would be a major milestone on Bristol City Council’s journey towards their
goal of ensuring that Bristol is a well-connected city with transport that is efficient,
sustainable and inclusive by 2050.
As the only UK local authority to have introduced a WPL, Nottingham City Council is
uniquely placed to share our skills and experience on WPL scheme development and
implementation. We are always keen to work with other local authorities, particularly
when it comes to carbon reduction projects, and I would be delighted to have the
opportunity to expand on how we can provide assistance throughout the process if
Bristol City Council decide to progress further along the WPL Route Map.
For now though, I hope you enjoy reading the report and that it provides further insight
into how Bristol City Council can introduce a WPL in the shortest possible time frame,
cost effectively and at the lowest possible risk.

Jason Gooding
Head of Parking, Fleet and Transport Operations
Nottingham City Council

Page 219
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |3
2.0 Executive Summary

The following Feasibility Study Report is submitted as non-statutory guidance on the
process for developing and seeking approval for implementing a WPL scheme in
Bristol city centre. The report refers to statutory guidance as set out in the Transport
Act 2000, which is the guiding primary legislation for congestion charging schemes.
The report will reduce risk associated with any WPL development by suggesting areas
where Bristol City Council should look to replicate Nottingham City Council’s WPL and
where there is scope to define unique, specific elements in line with local objectives
and conditions.
The implementation of the WPL Route Map (Appendix C) will deliver key stages of the
WPL scheme development process in a structured, timely manner which will result in
an operational WPL in Bristol at the lowest cost and risk, while maintaining standards.
Appendix J contains a list of recommendations with suggested actions that will further
aid Bristol City Council in its progression towards a WPL. These recommendations
have been formulated as part of an in-depth programme of work, including
engagement and workshops held with senior officers from Bristol City Council.
The following key deliverables have been produced as part of this Feasibility Study:
1. A WPL Route Map that outlines the key stages and activities required to
achieve the target “go live” date.
2. Specialist advice and recommendations resulting from a thorough review of the
Atkins Study
3. A WPL Governance and Project Team Structure that would assist Bristol City
Council’s preparation for the delivery of the WPL Route Map
4. A Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan
5. A Risk Register that assesses Bristol City Council’s readiness for the delivery
of the WPL Route Map
There are an extensive amount of studies and supporting information available (Bus
Back Better, ICTF, JLTP 4, CAZ, One City Plan etc.) to Bristol City Council which will
all contribute to the development of a robust WPL Business Case. These pieces of
work have been completed or are close to completion.
The work undertaken evidences that Bristol City Council has an ambitious vision of
what it would like to achieve and a clear strategy that outlines the plans to deliver this.
Following the guidance within this report could achieve a WPL scheme “go live” date
of October 2024.
It is the belief of Nottingham City Council that Bristol City Council is well positioned to
progress to the delivery of Stage One of the WPL Route Map.

Page 220
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |4
3.0 Background

The following chapter provides a brief overview of why Bristol City Council are
considering a WPL scheme, what a WPL is and a case study of the performance to
date of Nottingham’s WPL.
Bristol
Bristol City Council, under the leadership of the elected Mayor, has an ambitious One
City Plan which is built around six core themes, all of which are underpinned by the
UN Sustainable Development Goals.
A key theme of the One City Plan is transport, where the vision is to ensure that “By
2050, everyone will be well-connected with digital services and transport that is
efficient, sustainable and inclusive; supporting vibrant local neighbourhoods and a
thriving city centre.”1
Bristol Labour’s most recent manifesto made some major pledges linked to transport
and air quality:

• “Deliver a mass transit system: This will be in the form of both an underground
and an overground – as well as expanding and improving our existing
infrastructure – connecting people to one another, jobs, and opportunity”
• “Better buses: Double the frequency and improve the reliability of existing bus
journeys through the Bus Deal and increase the number of routes so more
areas are served.”2
The manifesto also states:

• “We want to connect people to jobs, opportunity, and leisure. Over the last five
years, we’ve delivered a Clean Air Zone, a fleet of bio-gas buses, and laid
foundations for a mass transit system. With your support, we will deliver the
mass transit system, make our streets safer, and put walking and cycling as the
forefront of our transport policy”
• “Under a Labour council, Bristol will also provide free travel for apprentices and
students under-25”
• “Expand the number of Park and Ride sites”
• “Deliver a Clean Air Zone that charges non-compliant vehicles in the centre of
town”
• “Roll out at least two Liveable Neighbourhood pilots – with a view to expanding
it”
• “Deliver a London-style one-touch integrated ticketing system so that your ticket
can be used across different types of public transport”

1 One City Plan 2020 - link
2 Labour Bristol – 2021 Manifesto - link

Page 221
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |5
• “Provide more on-street bike hangers throughout the city”2
The prevailing issues of poor air quality and congestion that are faced by most core
cities apply to Bristol too and they are a significant threat, not only to the health of
Bristol’s citizens and visitors but also to the vibrancy of the local economy. Research
conducted by analysts INRIX showed that Bristol was the UK’s third worst city for
congestion with a commuter losing on average 103 hours in queues last year.3 Bristol
City Council have therefore set themselves the target of becoming carbon neutral by
2025 and for the city of Bristol to be carbon neutral by 2030.4

Bristol City Council will be implementing a CAZ in summer 2022 in order to bring air
pollution levels across Bristol city centre in line with national targets set by central
government. Over the past ten years, the city of Bristol has seen a 4.6% reduction in
carbon dioxide emissions released through road transport, compared to a core city
average of 5.28%;5 this shows that additional measures are required to tackle the
levels of emissions across the city and to improve air quality at pace.

Bristol’s JLPT4 sets out a vision of high quality, sustainable public transport
infrastructure and the proposed JLTP5 will look to build on that progress. For JLTP5
to be viable, it is important to identify measures that could deliver a direct and reliable
local funding stream to support these aspirations, which could also be used as match
funding to generate further significant inward investment. One viable funding stream
to deliver this vision is a WPL scheme.
Workplace Parking Levy
The Transport Act 2000 (as amended) contains the legal authority to introduce a WPL
scheme and one of the fundamental requirements is that revenue raised by a WPL is
ring-fenced for local transport policies.6
Specifically, the Transport Act 2000 Road User Charging and Workplace Parking Levy
Explanatory Note, states:
“The Act enables local traffic authorities outside London to introduce road user
charging and workplace parking levies to help tackle congestion and use the
revenue to directly or indirectly facilitate local transport policy goals of the
licensing authority.”

Not all elements of WPL schemes are determined in detail by the Transport Act 2000.
There is substantial scope for local decision making on how a WPL can operate, which

3 Bristol Post – Bristol ranked in UK’s bottom three for traffic jams - link
4 Bristol City Council – Mayor’s Climate Emergency Action Plan 2019 - link; Bristol One City – One City Climate

Strategy - link
5 UK local authority and regional carbon dioxide emissions national statistics, Department for Business, Energy

and Industrial Strategy - link
6 Transport Act 2000, Section 179 - link

Page 222
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |6
is why there is a need for a clear and comprehensive approach to scheme delivery,
as outlined in this report.
Case Study - Nottingham
Nottingham City Council is the only local authority in the UK to have implemented and
operated a WPL scheme. Nottingham’s WPL has been operational since 2012 and
some of its achievements are listed below:

• Over £83 million direct revenue generated
• Levered in an additional £200 million in grants or prudential borrowing for
improvements to the electric bus fleet, by using WPL revenue to match fund
• Winner of the 2017 Ashden award for Clean Air in Towns and Cities
• Constrained forecasted congestion growth by 47%
• A 5.79% reduction in average total transport emissions since 2012
The WPL has also allowed Nottingham City Council to acquire additional funding from
central government and together this has been invested in:

• A £570m tram line expansion, transforming a single line into a network with
17km more track. NET Phase Two alone serves around 1,800 workplaces
• £60m for the regeneration of Nottingham Station, delivering a 21st century
transport hub
• Support to the Linkbus network which connects key employment sites,
Nottingham’s two major hospitals, the two universities, East Midlands Airport
and the city centre
• The Citycard Cycles scheme – a citywide bike share solution
• The world’s largest fleet of bio-gas double decker buses
• One of the largest fleets of electric buses in Europe
• Providing grants of up to £25,000 to employers for cycle shelters, showers,
cycle infrastructure and safety equipment, the purchase of electric bicycles and
electric cargo bikes, etc.
Nottingham City Council’s significant investment in transport decarbonisation enabled
it to be the first local authority in England and Wales to gain central government
approval for its Local Air Quality Management Plan, critically without the need for a
CAZ.
The measures taken by Nottingham City Council have seen the city’s carbon dioxide
emissions fall by a quarter since 2015; much of this is a direct result of modal shift and
a significantly reduced number of car journeys. Due to the progress made so far, the
political leadership in Nottingham has set the city the target of becoming the UK’s first
carbon neutral city by 2028.

Page 223
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |7
4.0 Methodology

The following chapter outlines the various activities and workshops conducted by the
Nottingham City Council project team which contributed to the formation of the
Feasibility Study.
It was agreed that project work would commence in May 2021 and would be completed
and delivered to Bristol City Council for sign-off at the end of August 2021.
The scope of works and key workstreams to be delivered to Bristol City Council are
finalised in this Feasibility Study Report. The report focuses on assessing the
preparedness of Bristol City Council to start the formal process of delivering its own
WPL scheme.
The following key deliverables have been produced as part of this Feasibility Study:
1. A WPL Route Map that outlines the key stages and activities required to
achieve the target “go live” date
2. Specialist advice and recommendations resulting from a thorough review of the
Atkins Study
3. A WPL Governance and Project Team Structure that would assist Bristol City
Council’s preparation for the delivery of the WPL Route Map
4. A Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan
5. A Risk Register that assesses Bristol City Council’s readiness for the delivery
of the WPL Route Map
In the project proposal a number of different tasks were agreed between Nottingham
City Council and Bristol City Council. The aim of these tasks was to provide bespoke
information and knowledge transfer to Bristol City Council, while also providing
Nottingham City Council with key Bristol City Council specific information to enable the
formation of a tailored WPL Route Map. To gain more knowledge for inclusion in this
report, the following workshops were conducted:

• A stakeholder and communications workshop was held on 14th May 2021. The
Nottingham City Council project team met with Bristol City Council’s Head of
City Transport and Principal Transport Planner. The Nottingham City Council
project team reviewed the Stakeholder Radar (Appendix G) and the 2x2
Power/Influence by Interest in WPL Matrix (Appendix H), with the officers from
Bristol City Council providing feedback and providing details of additional
stakeholders which they felt should be included
• A second workshop focusing on milestones and dependencies was held on
19th May 2021. The Nottingham City Council project team met with Bristol City
Council’s Head of City Transport and Principal Transport Planner to identify key
national and local events that could impact on the delivery of a WPL scheme
and therefore would be necessary to monitor and manage if Bristol City Council
were to go ahead with scheme development. At this workshop, the Bristol City

Page 224
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |8
Council officers requested a high level three year Timeline for a Bristol WPL
Scheme (Appendix E) that outlines the key workstreams from the WPL Route
Map
• A third workshop focusing on risk management was held on 16th July 2021.
Nottingham City Council prepared a Risk Register which consisted of possible
events or scenarios that could pose a risk to Bristol City Council commencing
Stage One of the WPL Route Map. The risk register was shared and discussed
with officers from Bristol City Council. All the risks were reviewed and suitable
actions were identified that would mitigate the risks as far as possible. The
Bristol City Council Risk Register is included at Appendix I and is discussed in
greater detail in Section 5.6
• The Nottingham City Council project team also held ‘catch up’ calls at the
request of the Principal Transport Planner from Bristol City Council to provide
updates on the Feasibility Study and to gain input from Bristol City Council as
the project progressed
• Additional meetings were held between the Nottingham City Council project
team and other internal specialists who have all contributed to the production
of this Feasibility Study Report and shaped the deliverables

To continue the progress made within this Feasibility Study Report, there are a number
of recommendations made throughout the document and summarised in Appendix J
which would assist Bristol City Council to swiftly progress to Stage One of the WPL
Route Map.

Page 225
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page |9
5.0 Deliverables

The following chapter details the work that has been undertaken so far by Nottingham
City Council on the key workstreams and includes all relevant outputs, along with
referencing accompanying appendices.
The chapter also informs Bristol City Council of the scale and scope of the work to be
undertaken to deliver their own WPL scheme and recommends areas for prioritisation
to ensure a smooth transition to Stage One of the WPL Route Map.

5.1 Key Stages and Activities
The WPL Route Map outlines the key workstreams which are required to be completed
in order for Bristol City Council to successfully implement a WPL scheme. The
following section sets out the detail behind the WPL Route Map.
An essential part of the preparation for introducing a WPL is to understand the scale
and complexity of the project, the different workstreams involved and the necessary
skills, experience, resources and budget that will be required. Understanding these
fundamentals will ensure that the project is sufficiently resourced, robustly managed
and the expected milestones and outcomes are achieved.
Based upon Nottingham City Council’s experience, the WPL project can be split into
three main stages:

• Stage One: Scheme Development and Outline Business Case (OBC)
• Stage Two: Public Consultation, Final Business Case (FBC) and Scheme
Approval
• Stage Three: Implementation and Operation

Using a proven project management approach and experienced resources is essential
for a project of this importance, scale and risk, as this will ensure that the costs, quality
and expected timescales for the project are maintained and achieved.
The knowledge transfer of the key elements of the WPL Route Map to the Bristol City
Council project team will be critical once Bristol City Council approve and assign the
necessary resources for the WPL Project Team structure (see Section 5.4). The
establishment of a WPL Project Team, in particular the project management
resources, will enable the adoption of Bristol City Council’s preferred project
management methodology (such as PRINCE2 or Association for Project Management
[APM]) and subsequent suite of project management products, which are all
necessary to allow Bristol City Council to commence the initiation of Stage One of the
WPL Route Map.

Page 226
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 10
5.1.1 (WS1.0) Stage One: Scheme Development – Outline Business Case
(OBC)

Stage One of the WPL Route Map requires the commissioning and utilisation of
relevant studies and modelling to create a foundation to justify introducing a WPL
scheme in Bristol. The findings should be concentrated to inform the production of a
robust and detailed OBC, underpinning the implementation of a Bristol City Council
WPL scheme.
Stage One of the WPL Route Map sets out the five workstreams which will inform the
OBC:
(WS1.1) Supporting Studies/Information
Following reviews of the “question and answer” responses provided by Bristol City
Council Officers in September 2020, the Atkins Study and discussions held between
Nottingham City Council and Bristol City Council, it is clear that Bristol City Council
already have extensive information and supporting studies on key areas such as
economic factors, transport, congestion, air quality, deprivation and social
inclusion/exclusion, which will all contribute towards an OBC. However, some of the
information obtained (e.g. the Atkins Study) is now out of date and may need
updating.7
It is important to review all studies to ensure that the facts and figures that will be used
in an OBC are up to date, comprehensive and relevant to the project objectives. Where
this is found to not be the case, consideration should be given to the commissioning
of further studies that will support the production of a comprehensive and coherent
OBC by the end of Stage One.
Recommendation R1 – Review relevant economic, transport, congestion, air quality,
deprivation and social inclusion/exclusion studies and ensure that they are up to date
Recommendation R2 – Assess the need to commission new studies where
information in current studies is out of date
(WS1.2) Measures and Monitoring
The Atkins Study provides a good start in determining the potential number of
workplace parking places (WPPs) there are in the Bristol City Council Central Core,
Expanded Central Core and Citywide areas. However, as stated already, this data is
historic and it is essential that there is up to date, robust quantitative and qualitative
data available to assess the proposed scope and impacts of a WPL scheme. A robust
dataset will enable effective modelling and scheme development to be undertaken in
Stage One and will ensure that any risks regarding impacts or income are considered
and mitigated at an early stage of the project.

7 Atkins: Bristol Workplace Parking Levy Scoping Study, February 2011

Page 227
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 11
Conducting an OSPA to formulate a dataset which provides an early understanding of
the “make-up” of employers (type, size, location) and the estimated number of WPPs
in Bristol is key, as this information will provide a clear baseline for scheme
development and will inform key internal decisions on what will be included in the draft
Bristol City Council WPL scheme design (i.e. exemptions, discounts, level of charge,
etc.)
The data can also be linked to other council data sources such as the Local Land and
Property Gazetteer and Geographical Information System; this link will ensure that
information on all known employers is captured and maintained, establishing an early
and dynamic database of employers which is necessary for the licensing and
compliance phases. It is also important to ensure that all data gathered is General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) compliant.
Due to the importance of comprehensive and current data and its impact on the
successful implementation of a WPL, it is recommended that further parking studies
are carried out to bring the information contained within the Atkins Study up to date
and to populate some of the information missing from the final report.
Nottingham City Council is able to conduct a desktop parking exercise using multiple
regression analysis to estimate how many WPPs Bristol may have. The exercise uses
real time data from Nottingham’s unique WPL Licensing System to estimate how many
potential liable workplace parking places (LWPPs) another local authority may have,
based on the relationships between a number of variables and the number of licensed
LWPPs for employers in Nottingham. Once a study is conducted, it will be necessary
to update and refine the results periodically throughout the development and
implementation stages of the project; this will ensure that the datasets and estimates
are up to date and reflective of the current local economic climate.
Recommendation R3 – Carry out an OSPA to understand the “make-up” of
employers and form a baseline dataset for scheme development
Recommendation R4 – Commission Nottingham City Council to conduct a desktop
parking exercise using multiple regression analysis and based on Nottingham’s live
WPL Licensing System, to estimate how many LWPPs Bristol may have
(WS1.3) Modelling
It will be necessary for Bristol City Council to demonstrate how a WPL scheme will
contribute towards the delivery of its plans and priorities for the city (e.g. One City
Plan, Strategic Corridors, ICTF, air quality and congestion). Fundamentally, it is
expected that the focus of modelling should be on the financial, transport and
economic impacts of a WPL, although there may be other modelling considerations.
The objectives and content of the WECA’s JLTP5 must be included while also
addressing other priorities and objectives that are regarded as key to the future
success of the city of Bristol, Bristol City Council’s wider administrative area and the
greater Bristol region. It is essential that modelling shows the full extent of the impact

Page 228
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 12
and benefits that are expected to be delivered as part of the introduction of a WPL
scheme and the investment in the Bristol City Council WPL Package (see WS1.5).
Recommendation R5 – Model the transport, financial and economic elements of the
WPL scheme to illustrate how it would operate and fund future transport projects
(WS1.4) WPL Scheme Development
As identified in WS1.2 above, establishing robust datasets on employers and the
estimated number of WPPs will be necessary to assist in the outline WPL scheme
design (i.e. proposed exemptions, discounts, charging, income generation, business
support etc.). The data will also be an essential part of the Stakeholder Management
Strategy and Communications Plan as the scheme progresses and gains momentum.
It will be important for the datasets and scheme design to show how the WPL will fit
into the delivery of the wider transport vision of Bristol and the WECA through the
JLTP5 and One City Plan. Outline detail will be sought from key stakeholders as part
of the stakehol
der engagement process (see Section 5.5) and it is necessary to ensure that Bristol
City Council’s WPL scheme principles are outlined at the earliest stage.
A clear set of principles will result in consistent and robust guidance being issued by
Bristol City Council to employers and other key stakeholders, as well as ensuring that
any decisions on potential benefits (e.g. applying discounts to certain types or sizes of
employers) and impacts (e.g. estimated charge per LWPP) are identified and
undertaken in an informed and evidence based manner. The scheme principles will
be a key component of the Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications
Plan for early informal stakeholder engagement as part of Stage One of the WPL
Route Map and in advance of the public consultation workstream in Stage Two.
It will be important to develop and maintain a risk management strategy during Stage
One. A Risk Register should be created, assigned to a project team member to
regularly update and to add new risks and mitigations for identified risks. The WPL
Project Team should look to review the Risk Register regularly, with the document
owner flagging any new risks or confirming when risks are closed.
During WS1.4, attention should be given to starting to develop a draft WPL Scheme
Order. It will be necessary to have a draft WPL Scheme Order as an appendix to the
OBC and for it to be available for the public consultation programme (WS2.2).
The work carried out across WS1.1 to WS1.4 will need to feature in the OBC in order
to demonstrate the need for a WPL scheme, how much it would cost to operate, what
the WPL will fund and which geographical area(s) the scheme would cover.
It will also be necessary to undertake the mapping of current and potential displaced
parking hotspots around employment centres to accelerate the delivery of prioritised
traffic management schemes should a scheme larger than the Central Core scheme
be chosen. Once the WPL scheme “goes live”, it is likely that some commuters will

Page 229
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 13
look to find cheaper or free parking; it is therefore important that a hotspot mapping
analysis exercise is started to identify and address these potential issues before they
arise. However, if the preferred Central Core scheme is chosen then it is felt that the
existing Residents Permit Schemes should cover and tackle potential displaced
parking.
If a WPL is implemented, Bristol City Council will be liable to pay the charge and it is
recommended that early consideration is given as to how this cost will be met.
Nottingham City Council chose to implement a car park management scheme, the
WPC, which charges employees to park at their workplace in an effort to encourage
them to make more sustainable travel choices. The amount each staff member pays
for parking is dependent on their pay grade, with higher earners paying more. The
WPC scheme helps fund Nottingham City Council's parking management systems on
its employee car parks as well as being used to pay some of Nottingham City Council’s
WPL charge. It is recommended that Bristol City Council scope a car park
management scheme during WS1.4, to show that it is taking a lead in commuter
management.
As work for Stage One begins, a clear Stakeholder Management Strategy and
Communications Plan must be developed that looks to discuss and gain an
understanding of the future transport infrastructure that medium and large employers
would like to see introduced.
Recommendation R6 – Introduce a risk management strategy and regularly update
the Risk Register
Recommendation R7 – Draft a WPL Scheme Order
Recommendation R8 – Introduce and progress the displaced parking workstream to
tackle the potential displacement of commuter parking
Recommendation R9 – Consider the introduction of a car park management scheme
at Bristol City Council premises, where commuter parking occurs
(WS1.5) WPL Package
The WPL Project Team should determine the WPL Package, which will be funded from
the revenue generated. The WPL Package should be outlined in the OBC and it must
show how it will allow Bristol City Council to achieve the vision and targets outlined in
the One City Plan and upcoming JLTP5. The OBC should set out how much the WPL
Package will cost to implement and how it will be funded, i.e. through the revenue
generated by the WPL scheme and alternative sources such as grants, prudential
borrowing, etc.
It is a legal requirement of the primary legislation (Transport Act 2000) that WPL
scheme revenue is ring-fenced for the delivery of Local Transport Plan policies and
objectives. It will be necessary for Bristol City Council to identify what the WPL scheme
will be expected to contribute towards and how it is an essential part of the delivery of

Page 230
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 14
Bristol City Council’s transport strategy; this will also form a key part of the
communications messaging undertaken as part of the early Stakeholder Management
Strategy and informal consultation messaging and engagement.
Early thought should also be given towards what type of business support programme
will be established to assist and support employers in preparing for the introduction of
the WPL scheme. The business support function should advise employers on how
they can take advantage of key support packages relating to travel planning, parking
management, active travel and demand management in advance of the scheme being
implemented. A quality business support offer will help mitigate any negative
perceptions of the scheme and maximise early delivery of the positive impacts of the
WPL.
The expected outputs from the delivery of the five Stage One workstreams (WS1.1 to
WS1.5 above) will form the basis for Bristol City Council to formally progress to Stage
Two of the WPL Route Map and commit the necessary resources and budgets to
advance the scheme.
Recommendation R10 – Outline the transport package that will be funded by the
revenue generated from a WPL scheme

5.1.2 (PM1.0) Stage One Project Management – Outputs

The adoption of a proven project management methodology and application of
experienced project management resources to manage the internal and external
resources in the delivery of the identified workstreams will be key; it will ensure that
risks and issues are effectively minimised or mitigated, costs and budget management
is closely scrutinised and timescales are adhered to.
It is expected that at the conclusion of Stage One of the WPL Route Map, the following
outputs will be delivered and approval can then be sought from the Bristol City Council
management team to proceed to Stage Two:
(PM1.1) Outline Business Case (OBC)
The OBC will provide justification and a comprehensive explanation of the following:

• Why the scheme is being implemented
• What scheme is being implemented
• How the scheme will be implemented
• Who is implementing the scheme
• When the scheme will be implemented by

The OBC will be the primary document that Bristol City Council will use as part of the
public consultation exercise in Stage Two.

Page 231
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 15
(PM1.2) Supporting Appendices
All relevant supporting studies, information and modelling will be appended to the
OBC. The appendices will demonstrate that Bristol City Council have undertaken
detailed works to provide the foundations for a WPL scheme, which are supported by
relevant expert advice and, ideally, based upon strong evidence from Nottingham’s
WPL scheme. The appendices will include supporting studies, modelling and datasets
on employers to estimate the potential number of LWPPs, through OSPAs and the
unique multiple regression analysis exercise. The appendices will also set out how the
WPL scheme forms part of, and complies with, local, regional and national policy,
guidance and objectives.
(PM1.3) Draft WPL Scheme Design
The guiding principles for Bristol City Council’s WPL scheme will be set out at the end
of Stage One, to enable employers and key stakeholders to understand how the
scheme is expected to work and what impacts the scheme would have on these
relevant groups. The scheme design will also demonstrate the options around which
elements of the scheme may be consulted upon as part of the public consultation
process (i.e. potential discounts for particular types of employer – the NHS, emergency
services, charities, etc.).
(PM1.4) Approval to Proceed to Stage Two
The appropriate Bristol City Council approval process would need to be complied with
and relevant processes and procedures must be followed to enable Bristol City Council
to make a formal decision at the end of Stage One to either stop any further scheme
development, delay scheme development, undertake further works to enhance the
OBC or approve the OBC and proceed to Stage Two.

5.1.3 (WS2.0) Stage Two: Public Consultation and Approval

Stage Two of the WPL Route Map will focus on preparing the relevant documentation,
processes, procedures and activities to undertake a formal public consultation. A
formal public consultation is recommended as good practice by the DfT, although the
length of the consultation period is a decision to be made by the local authority. The
tasks mentioned will assist in formalising the OBC into a FBC, following completion of
the public consultation. The FBC will then be submitted to the Secretary of State for
Transport for their approval to progress to Stage Three.
In conjunction with the work above, a detailed scheme design will need to be
completed and the relevant specifications and procurement activities undertaken to
prepare Bristol City Council for implementation of the WPL scheme in Stage Three.

Page 232
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 16
Stage Two of the WPL Route Map sets out the four key workstreams required to
undertake the public consultation exercise and gain the subsequent approvals to
proceed to Stage Three:
(WS2.1) Public Consultation Preparation
Bristol City Council will need to create and manage the necessary public consultation
documentation (leaflets, posters, letters, etc.) and communication platforms (social
media, websites, phoneline, email inboxes, etc.) to deliver a thorough public
consultation programme. All events and activities (such as employer workshops) will
need to be planned in to ensure that the consultation is comprehensive, consistent
and actively engages all relevant stakeholder groups in the process. During WS2.1, it
will be necessary to work with representatives in marketing and communications to
identify if Bristol City Council have a policy for public consultation which they must
follow.
The latest government guidance does not state specifically how long a public
consultation period should be.8 If Bristol City Council are unable to show that adequate
consultation has taken place, then this could lead to the Secretary of State for
Transport rejecting or delaying Bristol’s WPL scheme. It will therefore be important for
the WPL Project Team to work with the marketing and communications
representatives to identify a sufficient consultation period and demonstrate that robust
and adequate consultation has taken place. Bristol City Council must justify the chosen
consultation period and show that adequate engagement was held with stakeholders.
Recommendation R11 – Develop a detailed public consultation programme including
specified timeframes, activities and methodology
(WS2.2) Public Consultation
The public consultation programme will require a significant amount of additional
resources to undertake events and activities, engaging with interested parties and
stakeholders through both proactive and reactive communications. The consultation
will include the processing, categorisation and management of all responses, as well
as any additional data collection, analysis and compilation of reports that will form a
necessary part of the submission to the Secretary of State for Transport for approval.
The result of the work detailed above will culminate in the production of a suite of
public consultation documents, setting out Bristol City Council’s response to the public
consultation and informing the production of the FBC. The resulting FBC will be the
justification for Bristol City Council’s WPL scheme and, at this point, the scheme will
be based upon robust and tested evidence, which has met or exceeded the legislative
requirements addressed in the Red Tape Challenge and has undergone significant
and sustained local, regional and national scrutiny.9

8 Consultation Principles 2018 - link
9 Department For Transport (2012) - Roads: Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) - link

Page 233
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 17
Recommendation R12 – Carry out a robust public consultation programme to engage
and consult with all key stakeholders

(WS2.3) WPL Approval
The FBC and supporting documentation will need to be packaged and approved by
Bristol City Council in consultation with the DfT. Once the FBC has been approved, it
will be submitted to the Secretary of State for Transport for their consideration and
approval. At this stage, the approval process, and therefore the timeline, will sit with
central government rather than Bristol City Council and any further work towards
preparing for Stage Three will be undertaken at risk until an approval decision is
provided. Early and continued engagement with the DfT and the Secretary of State
for Transport will be essential to minimise the risk of significant delays or changes to
the proposed scheme design.
Along with the FBC, the suite of supporting documents should include a finalised WPL
Scheme Order which is updated and reflects feedback from the public consultation
programme.
(WS2.4) WPL Scheme Development
In parallel to workstreams WS2.1 to WS2.3, a detailed WPL scheme development
programme will need to be undertaken to prepare the necessary information for the
public consultation campaign. Items to be addressed will include:

• How Bristol City Council’s WPL scheme will operate
• Who will be impacted
• What the charges will be
• How the scheme will be enforced
• What business support will be provided

The final options for the detailed scheme design will be agreed once the public
consultation has concluded. The scheme design and WPL Scheme Order will then
need to be finalised and submitted as part of the FBC and public consultation
documentation.
It will also be necessary for roles and responsibilities to be specified for the day-to-day
operational running of the WPL scheme. The procurement processes for the finance
and employer licensing systems must also be outlined in Stage Two, in order for Bristol
City Council to prepare the options and the preferred route for how they plan to operate
their WPL scheme if they successfully progress to Stage Three. The options for the
running of the scheme are in-house, joint venture or outsourced operating models,
which should be considered by Bristol City Council to enable the necessary due
diligence (specifications, tendering, procurement, value for money etc.) to be
undertaken and enable the preferred route for delivery in Stage Three.

Page 234
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 18
It is also important to develop and finalise the business support package programme
(e.g. travel planning and parking management advice and assistance, cycle
infrastructure grants, public transport investment detail and personal journey planning,
traffic management programme for displaced parking) that Bristol City Council will
provide in advance to employers to help them prepare for the WPL scheme.

5.1.4 (PM2.0) Project Management – Outputs

The adoption of a proven project management methodology and application of
experienced project management resources to manage the internal and external
resources in the delivery of the identified workstreams will be key; ensuring that risks
and issues are effectively minimised or mitigated, costs and budget management is
closely scrutinised and timescales are adhered to.
It is expected that at the conclusion of Stage Two of the WPL Route Map, the following
outputs will be delivered and approval can then be sought from the Bristol City Council
management team to proceed to Stage Three:
(PM2.1) Approved WPL Final Business Case (FBC)
The FBC will be finalised and approved for the implementation of a Bristol City Council
WPL scheme. The FBC will include all relevant supporting appendices, the final
scheme design, WPL Scheme Order and the supporting suite of public consultation
documentation. The FBC will then be approved by Bristol City Council and submitted
to the Secretary of State for Transport for their approval.
(PM2.2) Detailed Scheme Design for Stage Three
Bristol City Council’s preferred option for how it will implement and operate their WPL
scheme will be finalised and the necessary investment and preparatory works will have
been undertaken, to ensure that Bristol City Council is ready to deliver its WPL scheme
in line with the key milestone dates identified in Stage Three.
(PM2.3) Confirmed Project Plan to “Go Live”
Stage Three will include key milestone dates and activities that will require extensive
project management and allocation of resources, as Bristol City Council will have
committed to scheme implementation and the operational “go live” plan. Stage Three
carries significant reputational and income risks if there is a failure to deliver the
relevant workstreams or there are any delays to the overall programme.
(PM2.4) Approval to Proceed to Stage Three
The relevant Bristol City Council approval processes would need to be complied with
to enable Bristol City Council to make the formal decision at the end of Stage Two;
this would follow the Secretary of State for Transport’s approval to proceed to Stage
Three and commit Bristol City Council to implementing its WPL scheme.

Page 235
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 19
5.1.5 (WS3.0) Stage Three: Implementation and Operation

Stage Three of the WPL Route Map will focus on engagement with employers, to
ensure that they are aware of their legal obligations and the practical steps involved in
obtaining their WPL licence(s). The engagement will include demonstrating all of the
necessary front and back office licensing processes and requirements to ensure that
the scheme is successfully implemented and employers are acting in accordance with
the legislation.
Assuming Bristol City Council follow Nottingham City Council’s WPL scheme
implementation programme, employers will start to be required to license between 1st
January 2024 and 31st March 2024, as Bristol City Council begin to populate their
licensing database. There will then be a six month period of ‘no charging’ from 1st
April 2024, while work is actively undertaken to ensure employers are licensed
correctly and any non-compliance is addressed appropriately before charging
commences on 1st October 2024. These indicative dates provide Bristol City Council
with suggested key milestones for embarking on the WPL Route Map approach to
implementing a WPL scheme.
Stage Three of the WPL Route Map sets out the next four workstreams required to
implement and operate a WPL scheme:
(WS3.1) WPL Implementation
Once the implementation stage is ready to proceed, Bristol City Council will need to
create the necessary information and communication platforms to deliver a wide range
of detail to employers, to explain their legal obligations and provide guidance on how
to obtain a WPL licence.
The practical events and activities (employer workshops) in the lead up to the
implementation date should focus on providing employers with working guidance and
assistance in obtaining a WPL licence and complying with the legal requirements of
the scheme.
(WS3.2) Employer Licensing
It is recommended that a three month period prior to 1st April 2024 is used to populate
the licensing database with all employer details, ready for the issuing of the first WPL
licences. The system for obtaining a WPL licence should be straightforward for
employers with clear guidance as to what information is required. It is important to
support and encourage employers during this period to engage and apply for a licence;
focused employer workshops and targeted licensing support (small, medium, large
employers) will all assist in ensuring that employers are licensed before the scheme
“goes live”.
(WS3.3) Scheme “Go Live” (No WPL Charge for Six Months)

Page 236
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 20
The Secretary of State for Transport recommended to Nottingham City Council during
their WPL scheme implementation stage that a “no charge” period should be in place
for a period of six months. The period of six months is recommended as it provides
enough time to allow the local authority to work with employers to ensure that they
have obtained a WPL licence and are licensed correctly. Moreover, this provides time
for employers to understand their legal obligations and the potential consequences
should they not comply. The six month “no charge” period was extremely beneficial in
Nottingham’s experience, as a significant amount of initial non-compliance was found
to be unintentional and was rectified relatively simply by educating employers on the
details of the WPL scheme.
It will also be necessary to start the WPL licence renewal process during this stage as
a WPL licence is issued on an annual basis. Nottingham’s WPL operates by the
financial year (1st April to 31st March), as this fits in with most business’ accounts but
there is no reason why the licensing period cannot begin on a different date.
The window for employers to renew their licence opens three months before the new
licensing year. A period of three months allows sufficient time to process licences and
encourages employers to review and renew their licences in advance of the 31st
March deadline. The renewal process is straightforward and, in Nottingham, is
completed by the employer through their online WPL account, a process which
typically takes less than 10 minutes.
(WS3.4) WPL Charging Commences
Assuming the WPL scheme is delivered in line with the timescales above, charging
will commence from 1st October 2024. Compliance and enforcement activities will be
a priority for the Bristol City Council WPL Operational Team at this stage, in relation
to any employers who remain unlicensed or are believed to be licensed incorrectly.
Business support resources will continue to provide packages aimed at helping
employers to comply and manage their WPL provision and liability. The traffic
management team will prioritise addressing displaced parking hotspots that
materialise following ‘go live’. Furthermore, the team should monitor and respond as
appropriate when employers adopt parking management schemes and employees
change their travel behaviour (predominantly expected during the first three years of
operation).

5.1.6 (PM3.0) Project Management – Outputs

It is expected that at the conclusion of Stage Three of the WPL Route Map, the
following outputs will be delivered to confirm the completion of the project and the
Bristol City Council WPL Project Team will hand over any outstanding issues (e.g.
operational improvements) to the Bristol City Council WPL Operational Team, as the
scheme moves into its ‘business as usual’ phase:
(PM3.1) All WPL Employers Licensed

Page 237
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 21
All employers that provide any WPPs in the Bristol City Council scheme area will have
obtained a WPL licence during the “no charge” period and then rene
wed that licence ahead of the charging period using their online WPL account.
(PM3.2) Compliance and Enforcement Commenced
The Bristol City Council WPL Operational Team will have commenced all relevant
compliance and enforcement activities and will be focused on ensuring all employers
are licensed correctly and prioritising the deployment of business support resources.
(PM3.3) WPL Charging Commenced and Income Generation
The charging will have commenced and all front and back office processes and
procedures will be tested and operating. Income generation will be ring-fenced for the
WPL operation and accompanying business support, along with the investment and
delivery of relevant LTP policies and objectives (WPL Package) that are outlined in
the approved Bristol City Council WPL Scheme Order.
(PM3.4) Business Support Actively in Place
The business support team will be actively supporting the Bristol City Council WPL
Operational Team to enable a smooth introduction of the scheme and assisting
employers to manage their WPL liability and workplace parking. WPL business
support is expected to cover travel planning, car park management, journey planning,
public transport investment detail, supporting grants and cycling support.

Page 238
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 22
5.2 Milestones and External Dependencies

To establish a WPL Route Map, it is important to consider the project milestones and
dependencies that must be monitored and managed to ensure successful delivery of
the Bristol City Council WPL scheme.
The milestones and dependencies are centred around key national, regional and local
events that may have positive or negative impacts on the delivery of the project. The
Milestones and Dependencies Timeline (Appendix D) shows the key milestones and
events that will be important to monitor and manage in Bristol. To identify the
milestones and dependencies, Nottingham City Council met with key officers from
Bristol City Council to identify relevant events covering the period from April 2021 to
the anticipated Bristol City Council WPL scheme “go live” date of October 2024, when
charging commences.
Although it has not been referenced in the Milestones and Dependencies Timeline,
the full effects of Brexit are yet to be felt and it will be important to monitor the reaction
of businesses as the UK’s relationship with the wider world adjusts to this change. The
customs transitional arrangement will end at the beginning of January 2022, meaning
that importers must begin submitting their new customs declaration on all relevant
goods.10 It is too early to ascertain the impact of this on Bristol businesses but it is
clearly one example of why the continuing “new normal” post-Brexit needs to be
monitored.
55% of Bristol’s exports are sold to the European Union (EU) and nearly half of
exporters in Bristol feel that their trade with the EU will decrease post-Brexit, which
could impact on productivity and employment within Bristol.11 In addition to this, a
report conducted post-Brexit by the Centre for Cities estimated that cities such as
Bristol may see a drop in the Gross Value Added of the city due to their large share of
employment within private-sector knowledge-intensive services.12 It will be necessary
to monitor and engage with businesses as the EU trade agreement comes into full
effect to establish the positive and negative impacts, both short and long term, in order
to adapt to the new post-Brexit market and adapt the WPL scheme as required to cater
for these changes. Conversely, trade deals with countries such as the one recently
established with Australia open up new markets and opportunities for Bristol
businesses and could well see the “make-up” of businesses within Bristol change; this

10 UK forces to delay checks on imports from EU by six months - link
11 Why Bristol’s economic prosperity is ‘at risk’ – link
12 Clayton, N & Overman, H.G. (2017). Brexit, trade and the economic impacts on UK cities, Centre for Cities -

link

Page 239
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 23
could influence decisions when developing the WPL scheme such as the small
employer discount threshold or level of charge.
Since March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has seen countries around the world go
into “lockdown” and commuting reduce dramatically as people were instructed to work
from home. Across the UK, cities saw improvements in air quality and congestion due
to the implementation of these lockdown restrictionsbut unsurprisingly, the levels of
pollution increased again whenever restrictions were eased. Analysis conducted by
the Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs showed a 44% drop in NO2
levels from the previous year but pollutants such as PM2.5 and PM10 saw a steady
rise throughout the year. 13 The outbreak of COVID-19 led to an increase in the use of
private motor vehicles for both commuting and personal journeys, due to reduced
confidence in safety on public transport. As the threat of COVID-19 reduces and
confidence in using public transport returns, it is expected that levels of PM2.5 and
PM10 will reduce to pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels; however it will be important to
monitor the “new normal” in terms of travel behaviour and working arrangements. The
employment “make-up” of Bristol suggests that at least 50% of workers have the ability
to work from home in some capacity.14 It is important to continue to monitor these
datasets and manage the impact of new ways of working upon Bristol’s air quality and
congestion as we come out of COVID-19 restrictions, to ensure that the WPL scheme
and WPL package meet the needs of the post-pandemic city.
The local elections in May 2021 saw the Green Party gain seats in Bristol. The Green
Party endorse a WPL scheme as part of the solution to the congestion and air quality
problems in Bristol; therefore the extra seats held by the Green Party on Bristol City
Council increases the support for a scheme.15 It will be important for the Bristol City
Council Mayor and WPL Project Team to engage with the Green Party as part of the
development of the WPL scheme, as their support would be beneficial to the
successful delivery of the WPL project.
In order to tackle air quality issues in Bristol, the Bristol CAZ will be implemented in
summer 2022 and it is envisaged that the CAZ, along with other measures, will
improve air quality in Bristol and make the city compliant with central government
targets by 2023. However, the WPL Package will outline how the WPL scheme will
further improve air quality in Bristol in order to contribute towards the goal for becoming
a carbon neutral city by 2030 and ensure air quality levels are sustainable as the city
grows and prospers. It will therefore be important to regularly monitor air quality levels
to ensure that the air quality targets set out in the FBC are achievable and build on the
progress made by the CAZ.
The Bus Service Improvement Plan will be submitted in October 2021. Improving the
bus network across Bristol is seen as one of the main deliverables of the WPL

13 Bristol's traffic patterns have changed during the Coronavirus pandemic - link; Quino, V., & Enenkel, K. (2020)

- How have the Covid pandemic and lockdown affected air quality in cities? link
14 NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics, Bristol - link
15 Green Proposal to raise millions of pounds to shake up transport in Bristol - link

Page 240
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 24
Package, therefore monitoring the funds received and improvements realised as part
of the plan is critical. The WPL Package aims to build on the Bus Back Better
improvements in order to deliver the objectives within the One City Plan of making the
bus services in Bristol cleaner, cheaper and more accessible to its citizens.
Similarly, it is important to ensure that the active travel element of the WPL Package
is complementary to the Liveable Neighbourhoods policy outlined in the JLTP4.
The JLTP5 will set out a vision for transport in Bristol and it is important to ensure that
the WPL Package fits into the wider transport vision for the WECA, to minimise cross-
boundary conflicts in transport policy.
The CRSTS, which is a follow up to the TCF2, will go live for the submission of bids in
2023. The WPL Project Team will need to monitor and support any bids submitted by
the WECA, ensuring that they are complementary to the WPL Package and
demonstrate how they will help deliver the wider transport goals outlined by the WECA
in the JLTP5.
There are a number of major projects planned from 2024 and beyond that will also
require monitoring, these include city centre redevelopments and the implementation
of “strategic corridors”, which are areas where it is expected that Bristol City Council
will see economic growth following investment in transport infrastructure. It will be
critical to monitor and engage with these projects to ensure that the proposed WPL
Package integrates and supports the wider JLTP5 and One City Plan.
The One City Plan aims to create a fairer, greener society which residents are proud
to live and work in; key parts of the plan are to boost productivity, culture and transport.
The WPL Package should be viewed as contributing to the delivery of the wider One
City Plan goals, in particular the desired improvements in sustainable transport and
the 2030 carbon neutral city commitment.
The Timeline for a Bristol WPL Scheme contains key dates and periods for the critical
workstreams across a three-stage approach. The timeline has been calculated under
the assumption that Bristol City Council would begin to develop a WPL scheme in
October 2021 and aim to “go live” in October 2024.
It is essential to regularly review and update the Milestones and Dependencies
Timeline so that any impact on the delivery of the WPL Route Map can be identified
and included within the project Risk Register, with appropriate risk mitigation put into
place. A comprehensive review will be necessary over the next six to nine months to
inform Bristol City Council’s WPL plans, as the impact of ongoing dependencies such
as COVID-19, Brexit, Bristol’s CAZ and the Bus Back Better strategy become clearer.
Recommendation R13 – Monitor the new working arrangements and commuter
travel behaviour as a return to a “new normal” begins, following the lifting of lockdown
restrictions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic

Page 241
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 25
Recommendation R14 – Regularly review and update the Milestones and
Dependencies Timeline
5.3 Data Analysis and Quality Assurance of the Atkins Study

Nottingham City Council have carried out an in-depth review of the Atkins Study
produced in February 2011.
The analysis of the study sought to assess the validity of the methodology used by
Atkins to estimate the potential number of WPPs in the Bristol City Council
administrative area. The review also contains a high-level assessment of the small
employer discount threshold and provides an estimate on potential income based on
the study results.
The review is split into four sections:
1. Description of Methodology
2. Analysis/Critique of Methodology
3. Estimate on Potential Income
4. Recommendations
This analysis will provide a robust basis to undertake further work to calculate the
number of potential WPPs in Bristol for a Central Core, Expanded Central Core and
Citywide scheme area.

5.3.1 Description of Methodology

The Nottingham City Council project team carried out a review of the Atkins Study and
the following section provides a brief description of the methodology used by Atkins,
as understood by Nottingham City Council. The audit carried out by Atkins in 2011
focussed on collating data through site visits (car counts) and analysis of aerial
photography. Where car parks were not accessible or hidden, the surveyors based
their estimates for these sites on the proportion of the building plot (estimated by
surveyors) and an assumed relationship of one parking space per 25 square metres.
The survey results were then cross-referenced and validated with Valuation Office
Agency (VOA) data. The surveyors also used the VOA online search function to
validate the WPP estimates within hidden buildings or undercrofts.
A further check of the surveyors’ estimates was then conducted by Atkins, comparing
the WPP estimates for the city centre with the number of inbound private vehicle trips
made into the city centre. The surveyors considered the number of public car parking
spaces when checking the difference in the number of journeys made into the city
centre and the number of estimated WPPs. The difference between the total parking
stock in the city centre and inbound journeys made into the city centre lead to a surplus
of 5,936 spaces that were unaccounted for. Atkins concluded that “some” of these
journeys were for leisure or non-commuting business purposes but there were still
regularly unused parking spaces.

Page 242
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 26
Therefore when reading the Atkins Study, the final number of WPPs declared
consisted of a mix of cars parked in parking spaces, minus an estimate of how many
of these were fleet vehicles, plus estimates for buildings where car parks were not
visible.
The Nottingham City Council project team reviewed the Atkins Study results and
methodology against the successful methodology used when implementing the
Nottingham City Council WPL scheme and, more recently, when working with the
Leicester City Council WPL project team to estimate how many WPPs there may be
in the Leicester City Council administrative area.

5.3.2 Analysis/Critique

Nottingham City Council acknowledge that the Atkins methodology required significant
assumptions to be considered in order for a robust estimate to be derived for the
potential number of WPPs in a Bristol Central Core, Expanded Central Core and
Citywide scheme.
The survey that was conducted as part of the Atkins Study did not include any
engagement with employers. A limitation from this lack of engagement was being able
to accurately estimate the amount of parking spaces within a premise that are
attributed for fleet/operational purposes or customer usage. The survey was able to
estimate the amount of spaces designated for customer use at retail businesses,
however, in order to gather an accurate estimate of WPPs, it is essential to engage
with employers since they hold the necessary information. Furthermore, all
fleet/operational vehicles may not be easily identifiable within a car park. The
estimates do not consider behavioural patterns or any variance in the provisions of
WPPs at each premise, which a recommended OSPA will do.
A “feet on the ground” OSPA that factors in the concerns from the previous Atkins
Study will provide Bristol City Council with a detailed estimate of the potential number
of WPPs in the Bristol City Council administrative area along with data on the number
of employers, contact names, size of businesses, industries, etc. The data gathered
will assist the WPL Project Team with justification for the threshold when setting the
small employer discount.
Recommendation R15 – Conduct a “feet on the ground” OSPA that factors in any
questions from the previous Atkins Study
Additionally, the surveys were heavily based on business’ on-site car parks in the
Central Core. Although the majority of WPPs offered by employers will be on the same
site as the business premise, it is likely that some employers will hold contract parking
agreements with multi-storey and surface car park operators or have sites which are
jointly managed with other employers within the city centre area; this makes analysing
images and doing simple car counts ineffective for WPP estimations. The lack of clarity
on car parking spaces is shown by the large differences in the upper and lower
estimates for each scheme size, as shown in Table One below.

Page 243
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 27
Recommendation R16 – Identify and include any existing displaced commuter
parking counts in the WPP estimations (for example, on-street parking around
industrial estates)
Table One: Lower and Upper Estimates of WPPs in Bristol7

Scheme Size Lower Estimate Upper Estimate
Central Core 8,600 9,500
Expanded Central Core 10,000 15,000
Citywide 36,000 57,000

The Atkins Study methodology noted that it was unable to distinguish the number of
WPPs attributed to each employer within car parks for sites where there is multiple
employer occupancy.
A further key point to note is the lack of clarity as to whether the hospitals and
universities have been included in the count. In Nottingham, the NHS premises receive
a 100% discount from the WPL charge but are the largest provider of workplace
parking, therefore understanding whether the Atkins Study surveys included NHS sites
is essential.
The Atkins Study does not include any estimates for a reduction in employee parking.
Nottingham saw a reduction in workplace parking of around 16% when the WPL
scheme was introduced and the WPL charge was far lower than Bristol’s proposed
rate. It is important to understand the price elasticity of parking within Bristol to
determine what would be a suitable estimate for a reduction in parking demand, and
subsequently income.
Where spaces were not visible, the surveyors assumed that one parking space
occupied 25 square metres. The justification behind this assumed relationship is
unclear. Nottingham City Council’s experience would suggest that the assumption is
inaccurate since the car parks may not be marked and lined. It is highly likely that this
assumption will have led to some under and over-estimates in the prediction of WPPs.
The Atkins Study does not include a detailed breakdown of the sites that were
surveyed and audited. A review of the list of sites that were visited and cross-
referenced with VOA data would be recommended as a starting point in order to begin
categorising employers by size and industry.
In order to estimate how many WPPs Bristol may have, Nottingham City Council can
make use of their own real time data and predict the number of WPPs in the Bristol
City Council scheme area. The desktop model will use real experience to consider the
expected behaviour of businesses and commuters once a WPL scheme is
implemented. The desktop modelling technique can also be used to undertake
scenario testing such as the inclusion of NHS premises.

Page 244
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 28
Recommendation R17 – Review the list of sites visited by Atkins and cross-reference
with VOA data, in order to begin categorising employers by size and industry

5.3.3 Estimate on Potential Income

The Atkins Study calculated net revenue based on the estimated WPPs from the
surveys that were conducted. The net revenue was calculated on the basis of a charge
of £300 per WPP, which was in line with Nottingham’s charge of £288 in 2012. Inflation
was factored in and based on a Central Core scheme with a £300 per WPP charge,
the net revenue was estimated at £2 million - significantly short of the targeted £7
million per annum income target. Atkins also considered a £500 per WPP charge for
a Central Core scheme which would unlock the desired £100 million investment
package (~£7 million per annum), however there was significant concern regarding
the potential impact on local businesses and the burden the charge would place on
them.7
Early discussions held between the Nottingham City Council project team and Bristol
City Council officers indicated that a Central Core scheme is favoured.
Multi-storey car parks owned by Bristol City Council currently offer annual season
tickets ranging in price from £1,872-£2,496.16 The daily parking charge varies between
£10-£12 for Bristol City Council owned car parks and well-known private car parking
companies such as NCP.
In comparison to the market rate for parking within Bristol further analysis, potentially
in the shape of a survey, needs to be conducted to analyse the cost of all options
across the city that would be viable for motorists, to identify if the WPL cost is
reasonable, proportionate and will ensure the delivery of the WPL scheme objectives.
A survey should look to ask questions about commuters’ choices and future choices
dependent on set scenarios (i.e. implementation of a WPL scheme). The data
gathered from this survey would assist in determining a sustainable charge. Including
a survey question to ascertain the size and type of the business will help inform the
setting of a small employer discount threshold.
The cost of an annual First Bus Bristol Zone travel pass is £715.17 It will therefore be
important to take this into account when developing robust justification for the WPP
charge under an Expanded Central Core scheme. The WPL Project Team must justify
the charge by setting out Bristol City Council’s transport vision and the part a WPL
would play, e.g. influencing a modal shift in travel behaviour, reducing congestion,
improving air quality and funding more sustainable transport options as part of the
JLTP5.
Recommendation R18 – Conduct further research into the cost of parking provided
by private companies.

16 Car park annual season tickets and pre-paid tickets, Bristol.gov.uk – link
17 Bristol, Bath and the West Bus Ticket Prices – link

Page 245
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 29
Recommendation R19 – Conduct a survey in Stage One to further understand
commuter behaviour across the Bristol region

5.3.4 Discount Level
At the request of Bristol City Council, the Nottingham City Council project team have
also looked into the potential small employer discount threshold which Bristol City
Council could introduce as part of their WPL scheme. The Atkins Study modelled the
implementation of a small employer discount threshold for employers with ten or less
WPPs, based on Nottingham’s WPL scheme. Although the datasets and employers
were cross-referenced with the VOA database, it is unknown exactly what detail Atkins
obtained as the Nottingham City Council project team have not seen the actual
database which Atkins compiled from the survey. To accurately understand the
appropriate discount level that Bristol City Council should consider, it will be important
to review the original datasets collected by Atkins in order to identify gaps that need
to be covered ahead of a more up to date analysis and estimation of WPPs.
A review of the size of businesses in Bristol based on data from the Office for National
Statistics shows that not only is there a larger number of smaller businesses in Bristol,
they also account for a slightly larger proportion of businesses in comparison with
Nottingham. In Nottingham, 78% of businesses have less than 10 employees whereas
in Bristol, the figure is 81.5%.14 A difference of 3.5% may not seem particularly large,
however the number of businesses in Bristol is nearly twice that of Nottingham (22,780
vs 11,970). Numbers of employees does influence the number of WPPs a business
licenses for. It is worthy of note that despite Bristol having nearly 11,000 more
businesses than Nottingham, there are 255 more businesses in Bristol with over 50
employers, than in Nottingham.18 Table Two shows the comparison between business
sizes in Bristol and Nottingham.
Table Two: Comparison of Business Size – Bristol v Nottingham19

Business Bristol Bristol Nottingham Nottingham
Size (Number) (% of total) (Number) (% of total)
Micro (0-9) 18,560 81.5% 9,340 78.0%
Small (10-
3,350 14.7% 2,015 16.8%
49)
Medium
750 3.3% 535 4.5%
(50-249)
Large
120 0.5% 80 0.7%
(250+)

18 NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics, Nottingham - link
19 NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics, Bristol - link; NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics, Nottingham -

link

Page 246
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 30
The proposed Bristol WPL scheme is a Central Core scheme and this area is
understood to be heavily office based with predominantly professional/administrative
industries located around the city centre. The NOMIS, Official Labour Market Statistics
for Bristol suggests that around 40% of industries (J, K, L, M, N and P in the referenced
dataset) in Bristol could be categorised as office based and it would be reasonable to
assume the majority of these are located within the Central Core.19 If this assumption
is true then it would be reasonable to suggest to Bristol City Council that a lower small
employer discount threshold should be considered for their WPL scheme.
The results gathered in the Atkins Study show significant variance between the upper
and lower estimates both with (Table Three) and without (Table One) the small
employer discount threshold. The large range of variation in the estimates reinforces
the need for new, targeted parking studies to be conducted in order for more accurate
data to be gathered and to be used to form the basis of financial modelling for a WPL
scheme.
Table Three: Lower and Upper Estimates of WPPs After a 10 Place Small Employer
Discount Threshold in Bristol7

Scheme Size Lower Estimate Upper Estimate
Central Core 7,600 8,700
Expanded Central Core 12,100 17,400
Citywide 27,200 49,700

Page 247
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 31
5.4 Governance and Project Team Structure

5.4.1 Introduction

The Governance and Project Team Structure is outlined in Appendix F. The chart
demonstrates the range of roles and resources that are required to deliver Stage One
of the WPL Route Map. The majority of these roles will not need to be permanent posts
but it is essential that experienced lead officers are identified and allowed sufficient
time to be fully briefed on the proposed Bristol City Council WPL scheme details.
Furthermore, the officers’ roles and their responsibilities regarding the delivery of
Stage One must be discussed and confirmed as appropriate for a project of this scale
and complexity.
Bristol City Council will need to decide whether to resource internally or externally for
the WPL Project Team roles. The initial discussions that Nottingham City Council held
with the Bristol City Council management team has led to the production of the
Governance and Project Team Structure. However, it may be necessary to amend this
structure as the project progresses if resource availability, experience and/or
requirements change.

5.4.2 Governance

Best practice with any large-scale and complex project is to have the right governance
structures in place to manage and support the work being undertaken. An effective
governance structure will enable efficient management and decision making to support
the delivery of the WPL Route Map.
A clear governance structure ensures that key leadership roles are in place to control
Bristol City Council’s commitment and resources to successfully deliver a WPL
scheme. Clearly setting out the levels of decision making and accountability will allow
effective management to be in place at all levels of the project. The formation of a
good project structure provides guidance, direction and performance management as
part of the supporting project processes.

Project governance also formalises the “what if” scenarios pertaining to issue
management (e.g. budget restrictions, unforeseen project events, scope creep, etc.)
and decision management. It will resolve the uncertainties of “who can decide what”
in a project environment and is intended to clarify the roles and responsibilities of all
project members.
Every project needs clear leadership and the concept of a single point of accountability
is a key part of effective project governance. The right people must be made
accountable and endorsed/empowered by senior management to hold sufficient
authority within the organisation, so they can effectively deliver.

Page 248
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 32
5.4.3 Governance Team Structure

The governance structure has been populated after workshop discussions with
relevant teams at Bristol City Council and Nottingham City Council, utilising lessons
learnt and experience from Nottingham’s scheme delivery. The structure has then
been tailored for Bristol City Council based on their own governance policy. The
structure sets out the “chain of command” that will allow for swift decision making by
officers across Bristol City Council.
Bristol Transport Board
The Bristol Transport Board has been created to oversee the delivery and
implementation of Bristol’s Transport Strategy and is one of six bodies working
towards the delivery of the One City Plan.
The Bristol Transport Board consists of senior stakeholders across Bristol, the WECA
and relevant transport groups. The Board meet on a quarterly basis but should also
meet at key stages and decision points throughout the WPL project.
The Bristol Transport Board would be provided with regular updates on the delivery of
the WPL project, the scheme design, high level risks and mitigation options. The Board
would also be asked to review and approve key policy decisions and provide guidance
on issue resolution. The Board would provide direction to ensure that the WPL Project
Team is resourced, supported and held accountable for delivery.
WPL Steering Group
The WPL Steering Group would be chaired by the relevant Director with overall
accountability for the WPL project delivery. The Director would be supported by the
Lead Manager and WPL Project Manager. Identifying other members of the Steering
Group is flexible as people will be required at different stages and key points. Steering
Group members should be of an appropriate level so that the respective services are
effectively represented.
The Steering Group would follow a set agenda, meet six weekly and be focused on
project management delivery and issue resolution; they would also review progress
on all relevant WPL workstreams contained within the WPL Route Map and undertake
the necessary due diligence to take key decisions and preferred options to the Bristol
Transport Board for their review and approval.

5.4.4 WPL Project Team

The following recommended WPL Project Team is based on Nottingham City Council’s
own WPL project and lessons learnt. Across the stages various individuals with
specialist backgrounds will be required. For consistency,it is important that the project
is directed by an experienced project manager who is supported by
officers/coordinators who are committed and focussed solely on the delivery of the

Page 249
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 33
WPL project. It is essential that the WPL project is a major focus of those on the WPL
Project Team due to the size and nature of the scheme.

5.4.5 Internal (Bristol City Council) WPL Project Team Structure

Lead Manager
The Lead Manager will have direct responsibility for the delivery of the WPL Route
Map and managing the project management resources. They will report directly to the
Director responsible for the WPL Steering Group and their role will be to remove any
unnecessary delays to decision making outside of the governance meetings.
Project Manager
An experienced Project Manager should be assigned to this key role as they will be
responsible for the management and delivery of the day-to-day project and the
resources allocated to them. All relevant supporting project management processes,
procedures and documentation will be managed by this role.
Project Support Officer
Project support will need to be flexible and allocated as required to ensure that there
is the right level of support, capacity and experience available to the Project Manager
throughout delivery of the project.
WPL Package Lead Officer
The WPL OBC is the key output to be produced in Stage One of the WPL Route Map
and it will focus heavily on the proposed benefits of the delivery of a range of JLTP
and One City Plan policies and objectives, predominantly delivering a step change in
public transport infrastructure and services and the resulting outcomes and benefits
that these will achieve (the WPL Package). It is recommended that, for clarity, a single
point of contact is identified and leads on coordinating the development of the separate
elements that will make up the WPL Package. The WPL Package Lead Officer will
need to liaise with all relevant associated services, such as public transport and
transport strategy.
Economic Development Lead
Understanding and evidencing the risks and opportunities for the impact of a WPL
scheme for Bristol City Council in terms of its economy is key. A leading officer from
the economic development team contributing to the current and future visions for the
city in terms of jobs, growth, inward investment and business needs, is a major
component of the OBC. The officer will bring valuable insight into business viewpoints
and pressures that will form a key input into the Stakeholder Management Strategy
and Communications Plan and can facilitate early and sustained engagement with the
business community.

Page 250
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 34
JLTP Lead
The WPL revenue is ring-fenced for the delivery of JLTP and One City Plan policies
and objectives, so having a lead officer who can ensure that the WPL is clearly linked
to these policies is vital. The JLTP Lead’s ability to look for opportunities to link into
wider policies and objectives for the city, other than just transport, will also strengthen
the OBC and ensure that it remains up to date and integrated with emerging
government policy.
Legal Services Lead
Although external legal support will be required, it is recommended that Bristol City
Council allocate an internal legal resource who can ensure compliance with both
internal and external legal processes and mitigate risk. The ability to have internal and
external legal support enables a more robust check and challenge of key elements of
the design of the WPL scheme, especially in the early stages, to ensure that the basis
of the scheme is legally sound and risk mitigation is robust and evidenced based.
Procurement Lead
An officer from the procurement team will lead and advise on the appropriate
procurement options for smooth delivery of the specification, tendering and
procurement of external resources, while minimising unnecessary delays and
ensuring compliance with relevant internal procedures and procurement legislation,
e.g. Official Journal of the European Union requirements.
Finance Lead
An internal finance lead will be required to ensure that the necessary funding and
expenditure processes and procedures are in place to establish the WPL Project Team
and guarantee that financial regulations are complied with as part of project delivery.
The Finance Lead will also input into the financial modelling workstreams, by providing
source data and internal quality assurance that the financial business case
assumptions are robust and that expenditure and income assumptions are managed
at the appropriate level of risk.
Information Governance and Risk
With a project of this nature, Nottingham City Council would expect assignment of an
officer from the Information Governance and Risk team, as it is important that the
project is GDPR compliant at all stages.
Communications Officer(s)
The Communications Officer is a key role in order to establish a clear strategy for
managing stakeholders and delivering the appropriate communications messages and
campaigns during WPL Route Map delivery. Communications Officers will also initiate
early informal engagement, capturing any responses to inform the future Stakeholder
Management Strategy and Communications Plan. They will also be required to set out

Page 251
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 35
key messages and briefings for internal and external officers, along with proactively
and reactively managing the media interest and engagement throughout the various
stages of project delivery.

5.4.6 External (non-Bristol City Council) Project Team Structure

The following roles are expected to be provided by external consultants, as these are
highly specialised roles and will need to be called upon as and when required.
Project Management
Assigning the right level of experienced project management resource and the
necessary project support in a timely manner will play a major part in ensuring Bristol
City Council’s readiness to commence the delivery of Stage One of the WPL Route
Map. It will be necessary to undertake a clear programme of knowledge transfer to this
team, to enable them to coordinate and initiate the production of all relevant
documentation, processes and procedures that will be required to manage a project
of this scale and complexity and make best use of resources to deliver on time, cost
and quality.
Nottingham City Council WPL Support
Nottingham City Council have invaluable knowledge and experience regarding how to
design, deliver and operate a WPL scheme since they are the first (and only) UK
authority to be operating a scheme of this type. Nottingham City Council will be able
to apply its expert knowledge and experience to tailor a support package across a
range of aspects of WPL delivery to suit the requirements of Bristol City Council.
The support offered would prove invaluable in reducing cost, time and risk associated
with the development of Bristol City Council’s own WPL scheme by following a proven
methodology and incorporating lessons learnt. The high value associated with Bristol’s
WPL scheme means that delivering the scheme a year early would be worth £7 million
to Bristol City Council, or £800,000 per month. Further, the political and reputational
benefits of delivering an effective scheme in a timely manner are innumerable.
Parliamentary Agents
It will be necessary to assign appropriately experienced and resourced Parliamentary
Agents to ensure that the tailored WPL scheme for Bristol City Council is fully
compliant with current and emerging government legislation and any risks or issues
are evidenced and mitigated, to ensure a ratified and legally robust proposal is
delivered. These agents will also work in partnership with the Bristol City Council Legal
Services Lead identified above.
Economic Consultants
Economic modelling and studies will be required to build upon existing work in order
to identify and support the proposed impacts of congestion on Bristol’s economy, along

Page 252
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 36
with what benefits the WPL scheme and WPL Package will have. These studies and
subsequent findings will be a key component of evidence to support the WPL OBC
and the justification for why a WPL scheme is the right choice for Bristol City Council
to deliver their future strategic vision for Bristol.
Transport Consultants
Transport Consultants will be required to model and evidence the future predicted
peak congestion levels and types (commuter, through traffic, residential, retail, leisure,
etc.) for Bristol and the surrounding conurbation, in addition to assessing the impacts
this will have on the city, its citizens and the local economy. It will then be necessary
to model the range of options along with the positive impacts that will be expected to
be delivered as part of the WPL Package. The transport modelling work will need to
be completed in partnership with the relevant economic modelling to show a robust
case for how the WPL provides a vital contribution towards delivering the future vision
for the city. It will also be important to include relevant social impact studies as part of
these works.
Business Improvement Districts and Business Forum
These are groups of key stakeholders identified by Bristol City Council, who will be
kept up to date with regular communications on how the WPL scheme is progressing
and will be an essential source of early feedback from the business community
regarding Bristol City Council’s proposed WPL plans.
The proposed Governance and Project Team Structure will ensure that Bristol’s WPL
scheme is delivered on time, at low cost and with risks mitigated and removed where
possible. As the project moves into Stage Three, a well-rounded project team and
clear governance strategy will mean that businesses are prepared and willing to
licence and ensure that Bristol’s WPL scheme is implemented effectively.
Recommendation R20 – Follow the Governance and Project Team Structure outlined
in Appendix F and Section 5.4

Page 253
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 37
5.5 Stakeholder Management Strategy and
Communications Plan

A Stakeholder Management Strategy and accompanying Communications Plan will
be key requirements in order to deliver a Bristol City Council WPL scheme as
effectively as possible. The main objectives will be:

• To ensure that appropriate stakeholders are identified and regularly updated
throughout the development of the project
• To engage with stakeholders to promote support for the WPL scheme
• To proactively manage the relationship of the project with stakeholders
throughout the project lifecycle, including the development and implementation
stages
• To ensure that all enquiries and concerns raised by the stakeholders are
recorded, reviewed and responded to as appropriate, in a timely and effective
manner

5.5.1 Stakeholder Management Strategy

Principles

Stakeholder management is the systematic identification, analysis and planning of
actions to communicate with, negotiate with and influence stakeholders. Stakeholders
are all those who have an interest or role in the project or are impacted by the project.
Effective stakeholder management is critical to a WPL scheme throughout all stages,
as stakeholders will have influence over the criteria by which the scheme’s success
will be judged.

One of the leading causes of project failure is insufficient involvement of key
stakeholders; this section seeks to identify, examine and understand the different
stakeholders for this project and explore their importance, in order to outline a process
for effective stakeholder management and communication.
The Stakeholder Radar (Appendix G) and the 2x2 Power/Influence by Interest in WPL
Matrix (Appendix H) are diagrams that provide an illustration of:

• Who the stakeholders are
• What segment they belong to
• The influence they possess
• The interest the stakeholders are likely to have in the implementation of
the WPL scheme
• The frequency and type of communication that will be required to ensure
that these stakeholders are fully engaged with the project

Page 254
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 38
Communication will play a vital role in the success of this project and processes must
be in place to ensure the timely and appropriate generation, collection and
dissemination of key information throughout all stages of project delivery.
Stakeholder Appendices
The Stakeholder Radar provides an understanding of the different methods and
frequency of communication that each stakeholder layer and domain will require.
The Stakeholder Radar forms the basis for the different messages that need to be
communicated to each stakeholder, depending on the layer and segment they are
located in. Tailoring messages specific to each stakeholder group will ensure that the
interest levels held by stakeholders remain high. For example, stakeholders within the
Governance domain will require more detailed engagement and communication
regarding the overall WPL project, whereas communication with stakeholders within
the Customer domain should look to emphasise how the WPL Package will benefit
them. The Stakeholder Radar can assist the formation of a Stakeholder Management
Strategy and Communications Plan by the designated Communications Officer.
The 2x2 Power/Influence by Interest in WPL Project Matrix allows each stakeholder to
be seen in terms of their power/influence over the proposed WPL scheme and their
interest in the WPL project.
Identification of Stakeholders
Stakeholder management begins with the identification of all stakeholders who should
be involved in, or who will be affected by, the project once Stage One of the WPL
Route Map is initiated.
The process began with officers from the Nottingham City Council project team plotting
generic stakeholders onto the Stakeholder Radar. The Stakeholder Radar was then
reviewed further and updated at a workshop with Bristol City Council’s Head of City
Transport and Principal Transport Planner, to identify stakeholder groups that are
unique to the Bristol scheme. The updated Stakeholder Radar has also been reviewed
by Bristol City Council’s communications experts. The Stakeholder Radar agreed with
the Engagement and Active Travel Team Manager from Bristol City Council is now
attached at Appendix G.
The Stakeholder Radar has been segmented into four domains:

• Governance
• Customers
• Stakeholders
• Influencers
Four layers to the Stakeholder Radar then assist with prioritising each domain:
1. V = Vital to engage

Page 255
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 39
2. N = Necessary to engage with
3. G = Good to have engaged
4. C = Courtesy to inform

The closer the stakeholders are to the centre of the Stakeholder Radar, the more
important communication with them is.
The WPL Route Map assists with understanding when it will be important to
communicate with stakeholders within each layer of the Stakeholder Radar. During
Stage One, it is recommended to prioritise engaging with stakeholders in layers V and
N. The stakeholders within these groups will be pivotal to the project and will be key
decision makers. As the project develops and progresses to Stage Two and Stage
Three, engagement and communication with stakeholders in layers G and C will take
place. The Stakeholder Radar is a dynamic document and should be updated as the
project progresses and new stakeholders emerge.
So that stakeholders can be efficiently managed, the stakeholder domains are defined
as follows:

1. Governance – Includes the key leaders and decision makers within Bristol
City Council who have the power to shape the WPL project. From political
figures who will be key figureheads for the endorsement of a WPL scheme
in Bristol through to Bristol City Council officers who will be responsible for
overseeing the development, implementation and eventual operation of a
Bristol WPL scheme

2. Customer – Includes the groups that will be subject to compliance with the
WPL scheme once it has been implemented. It will be vital to engage with
the businesses who are expected to provide the highest number of LWPPs
(including the NHS, although a decision will need to be made as to whether
or not NHS premises will be liable for the WPL charge) and stakeholders
representing smaller businesses who will hold fewer LWPPs per business
but will form an essential part of Bristol’s WPL scheme. The scheme area in
Bristol is currently undetermined - confirming the potential charging area will
be a key workstream in Stage One and will then allow a more definitive list
of Customer stakeholders to be produced. It will be important to engage with
the Customer stakeholder group and highlight the benefits of a WPL scheme
in terms of air quality improvement and constraints to congestion growth. It
will also be important to communicate the WPL Package that will be funded
by the WPL revenue and how it will benefit the city and these Customers

3. Stakeholders – Includes the groups and individuals that will actually
provide the resources, infrastructure and decision making for the
implementation of the WPL Package. It will be vital to engage with the One
City Transport Board which was created in 2019 to manage the

Page 256
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 40
implementation and delivery of Bristol’s transport strategy. The WPL
revenue is expected to be used to upgrade the bus network in Bristol with
sustainable buses, new park and ride routes and safer active travel
infrastructure to encourage more journeys via cycling and walking. It will
therefore be important to engage with the Public Transport Operators and
those involved in delivering the infrastructure. Legally, it is necessary to
obtain approval for the JLTP from the DfT. It is therefore important that there
is engagement with the JLTP team to ensure the WPL Package assists in
delivering the JLTP objectives

4. Influencers – Includes the stakeholders who will be influential but will not
be key decision makers for a WPL scheme in Bristol. Influencers all have
the power to influence larger groups, as illustrated in the Stakeholder Radar.
Additionally, with the aim of constraining congestion growth and improving
air quality, it is likely that environmental organisations and groups will
support the WPL scheme, therefore communication with these bodies will
be important once Stage One begins. It is important that effective
communication highlights the benefits of a WPL scheme to these
stakeholders in order to reduce scepticism and opposition to the project,
therefore reducing the risk. As the project progresses from Stage One
towards Stage Two and Stage Three, engagement with the stakeholders
listed in groups G and C on the Stakeholder Radar will be required.

Responsibility for Stakeholder Management
The governance of stakeholder engagement will be the responsibility of the WPL
Steering Group (see Appendix F). The WPL Steering Group should allocate
management responsibility based on those who are best placed and skilled to manage
a particular stakeholder engagement process, reflecting the nature and importance of
the stakeholder interest. Those with a strategic interest tend to be best served
corporately by the council and the WPL Steering Group, while those with a specific
project interest are generally best served by the relevant resource(s) within the Bristol
City Council WPL Project Team. Section 5.4 outlines the detail around the Governance
and Project Team Structure.
Stakeholder management and the allocation of responsibility will be an ongoing
process throughout the project’s lifecycle.
Stakeholder Engagement

The objectives of the engagement process will be to keep key stakeholders’
knowledge and commitment high by ensuring that they are informed at the right stages
and provided with correct, clear and consistent information throughout the WPL
project. Clear communication will ensure that expectations are consistent and in line
with deliverables.

Page 257
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 41
The development of a Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan
will assist in determining what will be communicated, how it will be communicated, by
when, and by whom, in order to manage Bristol City Council’s readiness to commence
delivery of Stage One of the WPL Route Map.

The questions to consider for each stakeholder are:

• What will be the objectives of each engagement/communication?
• What will be the key messages?
• What information will be communicated and by whom?
• When will information be disseminated and what will be the appropriate
timing?
• What information will be provided and to what level of detail?
• What mechanisms will be used to disseminate information?
• How will feedback be encouraged and what will be done as a result of
feedback?

5.5.2 Communications Plan

The following section looks at the type and frequency of the communication activities
and messages that will be required for each stakeholder group.

In developing the Communications Plan, the Nottingham City Council project team
have considered the potential issues that could pose a threat to the project (e.g.
employers refusing to comply, employees who drive, motorists’ groups, etc.) or provide
support to a WPL (e.g. environmental groups, political support, etc.). The WPL scheme
is still a relatively new idea for those involved and therefore early engagement with
stakeholders will be key to identifying reactions and attitudes, which can then inform
the development of an approach to manage them effectively.

The prospective WPL is a charge for off street parking that will generate funding for
strategic transport projects in order to tackle congestion and provide better
accessibility to all citywide. It is important that stakeholders’ reactions and attitudes to
a WPL scheme are identified as part of Stage One so that the right communication
approaches can be applied throughout the WPL Route Map and that the benefits are
relayed in a targeted manner.

The over-arching intentions of the Communications Plan are to:

• Highlight the justifications for implementing a WPL scheme
• Emphasise the positive aspects of the WPL scheme
• Show how the WPL scheme forms part of the wider strategic vision for
Bristol (The One City Plan, CRSTS, CAZ, JLTP, etc.)

Page 258
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 42
The rest of the section will focus on some of the key components of the
Communications Plan and illustrates the key considerations which are necessary in
order to gain support for a WPL. The components listed below will be a critical part of
the Communications Plan as they will help shape the messages for the informal
engagement phase (WS1.4) and the public consultation phase (WS2.2).

WPL Spokespeople and Figureheads
The WPL scheme is contentious and there will invariably be strong opposition from
some stakeholder groups. Political leaders will need to be resolute and a strong
leadership figure at the forefront of the project will be a critical success factor, as they
will be recognised publicly as leading the WPL scheme.
The Need for a WPL
The message as to why a WPL scheme is necessary in Bristol must be clear. All
communication strategies and messaging should emphasise the WPL scheme’s
importance in addressing Bristol’s air quality and congestion issues and delivering the
One City Plan. The communications must focus on why the WPL scheme is being
considered, with key messages including that the scheme:

• Targets peak periods of congestion, commuter traffic and air quality
• Does not rely on complex technology - it is a licensing scheme and is
therefore accessible with low-time commitment from businesses
• Will aim to improve air quality and tackle congestion through investment in
sustainable modes of public transport
• Forms part of the wider JLTP plan
• Has both low upfront and running costs

Transport Funding
In a bid to tackle air quality problems, a CAZ is set to be put in place in summer 2022.
It is expected that the introduction of a CAZ will allow Bristol to be compliant with the
national air quality limits.
The follow up to the TCF2 is the CRSTS, with bids for grants being submitted by 2023.
A successful bid could see Bristol City Council being awarded a grant for additional air
quality and congestion tackling measures. It will be necessary to monitor such bids
and liaise with teams responsible for them in order to factor in how the ICTF funding
links in with a WPL scheme. This will ensure that stakeholders and the wider
conurbation understand that grant money further supports the WPL Package, as
opposed to providing revenue to implement the WPL Package.
The income generated by a Bristol WPL scheme would be ring-fenced as part of the
JLTP5 to improve and create a high quality and affordable public transport network
that is accessible around the city. Clarity on the scope to which the WPL funds JLTP5

Page 259
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 43
projects and where the other funding is being sourced from will be needed so that
communications regarding the use of WPL income are relevant and consistent.
Environmental and Sustainability Issues
Bristol City Council have set a target to become a carbon neutral authority by 2025
and make Bristol a carbon neutral city by 2030. Tackling poor air quality is high on
Bristol City Council’s agenda. The WPL and the WPL Package will assist in achieving
the air quality targets set out in the One City Plan.
Traffic congestion is a significant problem in Bristol, as it is in other major UK cities.
Climate change, health and other environmental concerns currently feature strongly in
international, national and local media, more so than at the time of the development
and implementation of Nottingham’s WPL scheme. For instance, particulate matter is
becoming a major issue for cities; this is an even greater issue in areas of high
congestion where higher levels of particulate matter are caused from braking and
tyres.
Therefore, there should be an emphasis on the role that a WPL scheme plays in
constraining congestion growth, the scheme’s consequential air quality impacts and
the associated health benefits.
Communications Approach and Brand
The tone of WPL communications activity needs to be energetic and determined.
Communications should emphasise how the city is ambitious to move forward and
how the WPL scheme forms part of the overarching vision for the future of transport in
Bristol. Messages need to communicate that this forward momentum is a partnership
approach and businesses need to engage if Bristol is to prosper as a city. The One
City Plan provides the connection between the WPL scheme, the transport
improvements and the wider regeneration of Bristol and this will be beneficial to
continually demonstrate.
Communications activities need to be “human” – they should have
faces/spokespeople, as this approach is recognised as being more effective at
reducing business “mistrust” when contrasted with “faceless” activities such as
promotional literature or websites.
The use of public transport and active travel options are currently being promoted as
a substitute to driving into work in order to improve air quality and constrain congestion
growth, therefore the various Bristol transport organisations are key stakeholders in
the WPL project. Early communications must look to promote the use and expansion
of these services into the high-quality transport and active travel infrastructure that is
envisioned to be delivered as part of the WPL Package.
It is recommended that Bristol’s WPL should have specific branding, while still clearly
being linked to Bristol City Council and reflecting the wider development of Bristol.
Independent branding will ensure that communications are immediately linked with the

Page 260
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 44
WPL rather than other messages from Bristol City Council and the branding can then
be used on items from the WPL Package which have been funded from the WPL,
ensuring that businesses and residents within Bristol clearly see the benefits of the
scheme. The visual brand for the WPL scheme is still to be developed, however it
should be adaptable in order to reflect the varying preferences of the key stakeholders
in this project.
Key Messages
The details regarding the WPL Package are yet to be agreed, so the key messages
will need to be developed as decisions are finalised. The key messages should target
the particular preferences of target stakeholder groups and fit with the specific
communications channels being employed.
How the WPL Works
The details of the how the WPL scheme operates will be developed as part of Stage
One of the WPL Route Map and will form a key element of later communications.
These messages will become more important as the interest grows in the WPL project,
and as stakeholders start to request practical details regarding the scheme’s operation
and how it will impact upon them.

5.5.3 Communications Responsibilities

Bristol City Council Transport Communications Team
The Governance and Project Team Structure recommends a dedicated
communications resource who will hold primary responsibility for all communications,
planning, management and delivery. The communications role will include:

• Drafting and reviewing communications documents and briefing notes
• Planning and managing key communications events
• Proactive and reactive WPL communications
• Organising media and engagement campaigns
• Measuring and reporting on the effectiveness of communications activity
• Briefing key Bristol City Council representatives on the key messages and
Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan for the
project

Mayor, Bristol City Council Leaders, Councillors and other Figureheads

A proposed WPL scheme needs figureheads and spokespeople to positively influence
businesses and the public through both informal and formal communication methods.
Key responsibilities for these individuals would include:

Page 261
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 45
• Public communication - through media interviews, additional communication
modes and sponsoring and promoting the WPL scheme using an agreed
core script
• Attending forums and meetings with key businesses affected in order to
promote the WPL scheme.
• The consistent and reliable delivery of agreed key project messages through
more informal means, such as at business networking events and
conferences

Recommendation R21 – Create a Stakeholder Management Strategy and
Communications Plan to identify stakeholders and ensure that their interest levels are
maintained or increased

Page 262
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 46
5.6 Risk Analysis for Bristol City Council’s Readiness to
Progress Ahead of Stage One

5.6.1 Introduction to Project Risk Management

The following section documents the way in which risk management policy and risk
registers are implemented and managed. The purpose of this section is to assist
project and programme sponsors, project boards and project managers and aid
implementation decisions by enabling effective identification, management and
communication of project risks.

5.6.2 What is Project Risk Management?

Project risk management is the process concerned with identifying, assessing and
responding to project risks and it provides a disciplined environment for informed and
proactive decision making. The objectives of project risk management are to inform
decision making during project selection and definition, as well as improving project
performance during design and delivery. Adherence to project management principles
will assist the successful delivery of projects and lead to enhanced organisational
performance; it will also ensure that business objectives are delivered within the
agreed scope, quality, time and cost constraints.

Risk management forms an integral part of the project management strategy and is
essential in delivering a successful project. The management of risk needs to be fully
embedded into the delivery of a project and forms a key responsibility of the Bristol
City Council WPL Project Manager’s role.
If the WPL project is to be a success, risk management must be conducted and
integrated into the project management process from the start of the project. It is then
important to ensure risk management is upheld throughout the project lifecycle.

5.6.3 Issue Management versus Risk Management

A project issue is anything that can have an impact on a project (either detrimental or
beneficial) and is separate to risk management. Risks that have or will materialise are
no longer risks, they are issues. Issues can arise from a wide range of sources, they
can come in many forms and can occur at any point in the project life cycle. Issues
need to be dealt with as they arise and once identified, need to be captured in the
Change Consent and Issue Log for the project and the Risk Issue Template, as well
as being monitored on an ongoing basis. The impact and seriousness of the project
issues should be evaluated and assessed with any alternative actions that need to be
taken identified. The WPL Project Manager is responsible for managing and checking
the issue log alongside the Risk Register.

Page 263
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 47
5.6.4 Opportunities and Threats

Positive events (opportunities) as well as negative events (threats) need to be
considered when performing project risk management activities. If we consider only
threats when managing a project, then the best that can be expected is to meet the
promised objectives but never improve upon them. If there is an understanding of the
positives and negatives of all the factors that could have an impact on the project, then
the probability of success will increase. It would also reduce the potential for failure
along with any uncertainty of achieving the benefits required.

5.6.5 Risk Considerations in the Proposal and Approval Phase

The most significant project risks, particularly those that threaten the outcomes of a
project, are identifiable in this phase. For new projects, the risk management process
should be commenced at the outset with key risks being captured as part of the start-
up process. During project initiation (Stage One), a risk management strategy for the
project, including defining how risks will be handled during the lifecycle of the project,
should be established.

As risks are identified and assessed, they will be captured in the Risk Register together
with the planned risk mitigation, once these have been agreed. The owner of the risk
should be the manager of the risk management response and it is their responsibility
to execute and manage the agreed response.

5.6.6 Project Risk Management Process

The process described in this section uses six steps:

5.6.7 Methodology

With a project as complex as a WPL scheme, it is imperative that key risks are
identified and mitigated as far as it is reasonably practicable in order to properly inform
and reassure key stakeholders.

Page 264
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 48
In order to compile a Risk Register for Bristol City Council’s readiness to enter the
Stage One development phase of the WPL Route Map, the Nottingham City Council
project team extensively reviewed corresponding risk documents upheld following part
of their scheme implementation. These documents provide a robust starting point for
this risk identification and analysis exercise for the Bristol City Council WPL project.
A list describing constituent risks and the perceived threat level has been compiled
using the matrix below:

Initially, relevant risks were identified by Nottingham City Council and a Risk Register
was drafted, however mitigation activities were not allocated at this early stage.
Following further development, the Risk Register was shared with key officers at
Bristol City Council who were invited to comment ahead of a risk management
workshop. On 16th July 2021, a risk management workshop was conducted with
officers from Bristol City Council and each individual risk was collectively discussed
with input of the local expert knowledge of the Bristol City Council environment by
these colleagues. New risks emerged that were captured, analysed and subsequently
added to the Risk Register.
As part of the discussion with Bristol City Council, mitigation options were suggested,
discussed, rationalised and further developed. The mitigation measures were
subsequently scored and RAG rated, the risks were then allocated owners and this
was then captured in an updated version of the Risk Register.
Risk registers are dynamic in nature and evolve throughout a project. It will be a priority
to create a full Risk Register for Stage One once approval is received to commit
budgets and resources to the delivery of the WPL Route Map along with the
recruitment of the Bristol City Council WPL Project Team. Further risk registers will be

Page 265
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 49
required for the later stages throughout the WPL project. The current version of the
Risk Register is attached at Appendix I.

5.6.8 Summary of Risk Analysis

In total, 33 risks were identified that were relevant to Bristol City Council in terms of
their readiness to commence Stage One of the WPL Route Map.
Of the 33 risks, 11 were identified as red (high) risks and these should be prioritised
for early mitigation.
A further 17 risks were rated as amber (medium) and mitigation and/or close
management and monitoring is recommended.
The Red and Amber risks are categorised as follows:
Political Climate
Red risks 1 and 2 relate to the political situation affecting the country as a result
of Brexit, which could impact upon Bristol City Council’s WPL proposals and
timescales.
Amber risks 4 and 5 are JTLP related and risk 7 considers the “Levelling Up”
agenda and how, as it is not aimed at Bristol, it may impact on transport
initiatives.
Project Resources
Red risks 8 and 9 and amber risks 10, 12 and 13 pertain to the need for Bristol
City Council to understand the scale of developing a WPL scheme and secure
the relevant approvals and subsequent allocation or recruitment of the Bristol
City Council WPL Project Team in a timely fashion. These risks refer to both
internal and external resources, including specialists, which will be key to Bristol
City Council being ready to commence the Stage One activities contained in
the WPL Route Map.
Communications
There are no red risks and the main amber risks reference the critical need for
all aspects of the communications around the WPL proposals to be cohesive
and consistent, including the need for engagement with key figureheads and
dedicated communications resources.
Adherence to the Nottingham Model
Red risk 22 identifies to need to communicate Nottingham City Council’s
Feasibility Study Report to key officers and politicians.
Amber risk 21 refers to the need to follow the fundamental building blocks of
Nottingham City Council's WPL scheme to reduce the risk of legal challenge,

Page 266
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 50
deliver value for money and minimise potential delays to the delivery timescales
which would affect the 2024 target delivery date.
COVID-19
There are 4 red risks in this category, 23, 24, 26 and 28, and collectively they
highlight the unknowns in terms of what the “new normal” will look like in terms
of commuting and public transport patronage and the requirement to monitor
these behaviours to determine what impact they may have on a future WPL
scheme.
Other risks that are not referenced above are categorised as:
Amber risks 29 and 32 cite the WECA’s Bus Service Improvement Plan and
initial intention to focus on the Central Core area as positive reasons for
developing and introducing a WPL scheme.
Red risk 33 emphasises the need to monitor the Secretary of State for
Transport’s response to Leicester City Council’s FBC and proposal to
implement a WPL scheme in their city
If Bristol City Council’s ambitious scheme delivery date of 2024 is to be achieved, then
early risk mitigation is recommended to address the risks identified in the Risk
Register.
Successful mitigation of these risks will ensure Bristol City Council commence the
delivery of Stage One of the WPL Route Map in a timely manner, that is robust in all
aspects.
Recommendation R22 – Monitor and regularly update the dynamic Risk Register
document, with risks that are dealt with being closed, new risks being identified as the
scheme develops and adequate mitigation implemented

Page 267
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 51
6.0 Conclusion and Recommendations for Action

Nottingham City Council has conducted a thorough assessment on the readiness of
Bristol City Council to develop and implement a WPL scheme. The results of that
assessment have been outlined in this Feasibility Study Report.

It is clear that Bristol City Council has an ambitious vision and a clear strategy on how
to achieve this. In particular, Bristol City Council aim to make Bristol a carbon neutral
city by 2030. To achieve this ambitious vision, it is imperative that the transport projects
receive sufficient funding to enable effective implementation and to ensure that they
are of the scale required by the ambition.

Nottingham City Council would also like to highlight the extensive amount of
supporting studies, data and in-depth information already available to Bristol City
Council; this information will positively contribute to the development of a robust WPL
OBC, which will be the key output should Bristol embark upon Stage One of the WPL
Route Map.

For Bristol City Council to achieve a “go live” date of October 2024 for a WPL scheme,
it is essential that the momentum of the past six months is maintained and the WPL
Route Map is initiated.
Ahead of commencing Stage One of the WPL Route Map, the Nottingham City Council
project team recommend the following steps to be carried out as soon as possible:
1. Engage with, inform and provide the senior management team and politicians
with key messages to ensure that they are briefed on the potential WPL
scheme
2. Appoint an experienced WPL Project Manager to begin working through the
WPL Route Map and the recommendations in this report. Undertaking initial
work will ensure that momentum continues and that decision makers are kept
sufficiently informed
3. Liaise with relevant resources to begin the creation of a WPL Project Team,
advising them of what a WPL is, what they will be expected to contribute to the
delivery of a WPL scheme in Bristol, how much of their time is required for the
project and when their involvement will be needed based on the WPL Route
Map
4. Undertake a costing workshop with Nottingham City Council in order to begin
estimating the required budget for each stage and workstream within the WPL
Route Map
5. Track the progress of related schemes which are due to take significant steps
in the next six months (Bristol CAZ, Bus Back Better, Liveable Neighbourhoods)
and assess how any changes impact the proposed WPL Package and the
implementation of a WPL scheme in Bristol

Page 268
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 52
Further recommendations are set out in Appendix J and have been linked to the
relevant section of the Feasibility Study Report.

Bristol City Council is well positioned to progress with the development of a WPL
scheme and following the advice contained within this report will help to reduce the
time, cost and risk associated with WPL scheme development. Nottingham City
Council will continue to be available to provide its knowledge and experience
throughout Bristol’s WPL Route Map, offering a “critical friend” role and allowing Bristol
City Council to avoid and mitigate the challenges and potential pitfalls involved with
the creation of a WPL. Ongoing engagement with Nottingham City Council will ensure
that any future WPL in Bristol is fit for purpose and delivered as quickly and effectively
as possible, allowing the benefits of the WPL Package to be realised as soon as
practicable. The drive, vision and ambition of Bristol City Council is exciting and will
clearly lead to a high quality, sustainable transport system in Bristol.

Page 269
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 53
7.0 Appendices
7.1 Appendix A: Bristol Key Terms Glossary

Term Abbreviation Description
Atkins Bristol Workplace Atkins Study The Atkins Bristol Workplace Parking Levy Scoping Study 2011 was
Parking Levy Scoping commissioned by Bristol City Council to look into the potential number of
Study 2011 Workplace Parking Places (WPPs) there may be in Bristol for all three
potential WPL schemes (Central Core, Expanded Central Core and Citywide
scheme areas).The study outlines the methodology used by Atkins to
estimate the potential number of WPPs along with the costs to implement
and operate a WPL scheme in Bristol (2011 prices).
Bus Back Better In September 2019, the central government set out the Bus Back Better
strategy. The strategy sets out the vision and opportunity to deliver better
bus services for passengers across England through an ambitious and far-
reaching reform of how services are offered and delivered.
Bristol City Council will be publishing a Bus Service Improvement Plan which
will be developed with local operators, community transport bodies and local
businesses. The plan will set out the strategy and objectives along with a
detailed proposal as to how the objectives will be achieved and bus use will
increase. The Bus Service Improvement Plan will request funding from the
DfT’s COVID-19 Bus Services Support Grant and the Bus Service Operators
Grant in order to deliver the plan20.
Central Core The Central Core area is one of the three geographic options being
considered by Bristol City Council for a proposed WPL scheme. It covers the
major areas of employment within central Bristol and follows the boundary of
city centre activity. From discussions held with Bristol City Council officers,
the Central Core area is the preferred geographic option for a WPL scheme.
Citywide The Citywide area is one of the three geographic options being considered
by Bristol City Council for a proposed WPL scheme. It is the least preferred
option. The Citywide option would cover the entire Bristol City Council
administrative area and would therefore affect all businesses based in
Bristol.
Clean Air Zone CAZ A CAZ is a defined area where vehicles that have tailpipe emissions which
are not compliant with the pollution limits set by a local authority are charged
daily for entering. Bristol City Council are hoping to have a CAZ in place from
Summer 2022. The Bristol CAZ will be for Class D vehicles (cars, private hire
vehicles, taxis, LGVs, buses, coaches and HGVs) and will cover the Bristol
city centre region. The fee for Bristol’s CAZ is set at £9 per day for cars,
private hire vehicles, taxis and LGVs while buses, coaches and HGVs will be
charged £100 per day.
Draft West of England The West of England Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan is a
Local Cycling and significant and exciting first step towards transforming active travel in the
Walking Infrastructure region. The plan proposes capital investment of £411m by 2036 and is the
Plan result of a collaborative effort between the West of England councils, the
WECA and local stakeholder groups.
Expanded Central Core The Expanded Central Core area is one of the three geographic options
being considered by Bristol City Council for a proposed WPL scheme. The
Expanded Central Core corresponds with the area covered by the proposed
Residents Parking Zone “inner ring”, which would discourage parking
displacement on to residential streets by employees of organisations subject
to a WPL.
City Region Sustainable CRSTS The funding provides the necessary major investment for local transport
Transport Settlement priorities. The CRSTS is a follow up investment in local transport networks.
This new fund stems from the announcement made by the DfT that eight
eligible English city regions would receive £4.2 billion of additional funding
for local transport networks.
Joint Local Transport JLTP5 A Joint Local Transport Plan (JLTP) sets out the transport vision for all
Plan 5 authorities within a combined authority. The WECA currently have a JLTP4
that has set out the transport vision from 2020 until 2036. The JLTP4 will be
replaced in 2023 by the JLTP5.

20 Department for Transport – Bus Back Better - link

Page 270
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 54
A WPL scheme in Bristol will form part of the JLTP5; as well as tackling air
quality and congestion on its own, a WPL will also be used to fund some of
the other measures within the Plan
One City Plan The One City Plan outlines Bristol’s vision for the city in 2050 and confirms
the strategy to achieve the objectives. The plan contains six themes which
are responsible for achieving each objective. Each theme has a governing
board made up of experts and a cross-section of partners and citizens, who
refine the annual objectives as well as ensuring the delivery of the overall
objectives.21 All the initiatives within the One City Plan are underpinned by
the UN Sustainable Development Goals, which provide an internationally
recognised framework to benchmark the city’s aspirations and progress. The
One City Transport Board sits under the “Connectivity” theme and the WPL
scheme will feature prominently as a discussion topic at this forum once the
project begins.
Small Employer Discount Employers who provide below a certain number of LWPPs within the WPL
Threshold scheme area are exempt from paying the WPL charge. However, these
employers are still required to license each year. In Bristol, this threshold is
yet to be determined. In Nottingham, employers and any associated
employers who between them provide 10 or fewer LWPPs in total at all of
their premises within Nottingham City Council’s administrative boundary are
exempt from paying the WPL charge.
Transforming Cities Fund TCF2 The Transforming Cities Fund is a £2.45 billion capital grant transport fund
2 aimed at driving up productivity through investments in public and
sustainable transport infrastructure in some of England’s largest city regions.
The funding is for improvements into infrastructure such as new active travel
routes, smart ticketing and smart traffic controls. The last tranche of the fund
was known as Transforming Cities Fund 2. The WECA received £103 million
of funding as a mayoral combined authority.
West of England The WECA South Gloucestershire Council, Bath & North East Somerset Council and
Combined Authority Bristol City Council make up the West of England Combined Authority.
The WECA was formed in 2017 to champion the region and drive clean and
inclusive economic growth, with a central mayor collectively elected by South
Gloucestershire Council, Bath & North East Somerset Council and Bristol
City Council. The cabinet is made up of the Mayor of the West of England
along with the leaders of each member council.22 Although not included
within the WECA, North Somerset Council is considered a key partner and
for the purposes of the WPL project, their inclusion has been requested.

7.2 Appendix B: WPL Glossary
Term Abbreviation Definition
21 One City Plan - link
22 West of England - link

Page 271
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 55
Business Support A service currently offered by Nottingham City Council to businesses
within the Nottingham City Council administrative area. The support
includes running workshops and on-site events to provide sustainable
transport advice to staff. Nottingham City Council set up business
support under the Workplace Travel Service team. The team provide
advice and small grants (up to £10,000) to businesses. The grants are
provided to encourage local businesses to support the uptake of
sustainable transport. Examples of what companies use the grant
money for include, car park barriers, changing and shower areas,
bicycle shelters, etc.
Displaced Parking The displacement of commuters from on-site to on-street following the
implementation of a charge (e.g. WPL). In Nottingham, once the WPL
went live there was a displacement of commuter parking; this mainly
occurred at industrial estates where there is usually a lack of on-street
parking restrictions.
Liable Workplace Parking LWPPs A liable workplace parking place is a parking place provided by an
Places employer that is occupied by a vehicle which is used by an employee,
pupil, student or regular business visitor.
A regular business visitor is a consultant, contractor, supplier, agency
staff or other business visitor attending a regular place of work. A
regular place of work is a premises that a regular business visitor parks
at and attends on three or more days over a 14-day period.
LWPPs are parking places that are liable for the WPL charge.
Off-Street Parking Audit OSPA An Off-Street Parking Audit is an activity which the WPL Project Team
may choose to conduct in order to gather a thorough audit of the
potential number of LWPPs a local authority may have within their
designated WPL scheme area. The OSPA is usually conducted as a
survey with employers. The results from the OSPA inform the financial
modelling that is required as part of the FBC which must be submitted
to the Secretary of State for Transport.
Outline Business Case OBC The Outline Business Case sets out the preliminary thoughts regarding
a proposed WPL scheme. It contains the information needed to help
the local authority make decisions regarding the adoption of the project.
It states envisaged outcomes, benefits and potential risks associated
with the proposal. The OBC includes any studies conducted during
Stage One of the WPL Route Map.
Personal Journey Planning A service offered by the Workplace Travel Service team as part of the
business support they provide. Personal Journey Planning is the
assistance of planning journeys to and from work for employees of a
business who wish to use more sustainable methods of transport.
Red Tape Challenge Introduced in April 2011, the Red Tape Challenge was a government-
wide initiative aimed at reducing bureaucracy, giving businesses and
the general public an opportunity to comment on statutory rules and
regulations to decide which should be improved, kept or removed.
The Red Tape Challenge was applied to all areas of transport.
Traffic Management Programme A programme that identifies issues and solutions within the displaced
parking work stream such as junction protection, no waiting and
limited waiting.
WPL Licensing System The WPL Licensing System is an online IT system through which
employers register and update the number of LWPPs that they license
for at each premise.
WPL Route Map The WPL Route Map outlines the key workstreams that a local authority
must undertake and complete to successfully develop and implement
a WPL scheme. The WPL Route Map is based on Nottingham’s
experience as the first and only local authority to have successfully
implemented a WPL in the UK to date.
The WPL Route Map is split into three stages:
Stage One: Scheme Development and Outline Business Case
Stage Two: Public Consultation and Approval
Stage Three: Implementation and Operation.
Workplace Parking Charge WPC The Workplace Parking Charge is a car park management system
introduced by Nottingham City Council following the implementation of
its WPL scheme. The aim of the WPC is to offset Nottingham City
Council’s own car parking liability. The WPC places an annual charge
on Nottingham City Council employees who wish to drive to work and
the charge is taken from an employees’ salary each month. The parking

Page 272
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 56
charge is graded via salary therefore each individual relatively pays the
same amount in proportion to their salary.
Workplace Parking Levy WPL A Workplace Parking Levy is a charge on employers who provide
workplace parking. It is a type of congestion charging scheme that local
authorities are able to implement under the Transport Act 2000.
A local authority may introduce a WPL to tackle problems associated
with traffic congestion, by both providing funding for major transport
infrastructure initiatives and by acting as an incentive for employers to
manage their workplace parking provision.
WPL Package It is a legal requirement of the primary legislation (Transport Act 2000)
that WPL scheme revenue is ring-fenced for the delivery of Local
Transport Plan policies and objectives. It will be necessary for any local
authority that is considering a WPL to identify what the WPL scheme
will be expected to contribute towards and confirm how it is an essential
part of the delivery of their Local Transport Plan strategy.
Workplace Parking Places WPPs A parking place at a premises inside a local authority’s scheme area,
occupied by a vehicle used by an employee, pupil, student or regular
business visitor. Workplace parking places are not necessarily marked
or designated spaces. All employers may provide WPPs. For example,
a disabled parking place is still considered a WPP.
WPL Operational Team The WPL Operational Team is comprised of administrative and
operational staff. The administrative staff respond to emails and phone
calls, assisting employers with payment and licensing issues. The
operational staff visit premises within the administrative boundary to
ensure that employers are licensing correctly and assist with any
queries face-to-face. In Nottingham, the operational staff take a
compliance based approach and work with employers on an
educational basis to ensure that they licence correctly.
WPL Project Team The WPL Project Team are responsible for developing and
implementing a WPL scheme. The WPL Project team will usually
consist of a programme manager, project manager, project officers,
administrative staff and specialists. The WPL Project Team will work
with consultants and other service areas across the local authority to
successfully develop and implement the WPL scheme.
WPL Scheme Order A WPL Scheme Order is a required legal document that sets out the
details of the WPL scheme. It is the legal means by which WPL is
implemented. No WPL scheme can be applied without an approved
scheme order as it is the secondary legislation that permits a local
authority to run a WPL scheme.

Page 273
V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 57
7.3 Appendix C: WPL Route Map

Page 274

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 58
7.4 Appendix D: Milestones and Dependencies Timeline

30/01/22
01/06/23 01/01/25
Bristol Liveable
Joint Local Transport Plan 5 02/05/24 Free public transport travel
Neighbourhoods
Approved UK General Election to be offered to U25s
policy sign off

01/01/24 - 03/06/24
City Centre
Redevelopments 31/05/25
06/05/21 30/07/22
- St Mary Le Port Target date for BCC
Local, Mayoral and Bristol Clean Air Zone (CAZ) 03/06/24 - 31/12/24
- Gallery’s to be Carbon Neutral
WECA elections is implemented Strategic Corridors

Page 275
01/01/2022 01/01/2023 01/01/2024 01/01/2025 01/01/2026 01/01/2027
05/04/2021 31/05/2027

01/01/23
29/10/21 09/05/24 01/10/24 09/05/25
Compliance year
WECA Bus Service Improvement Local and WPL charging WECA Elections
for clean air targets
Mayoral commences
Elections

30/06/22 - 31/03/27
City Region Sustainable Transport Settlements

Italics = dates that are not fixed.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 59
7.5 Appendix E: Timeline for a Bristol WPL Scheme

30/01/2023 - 21/04/2023
01/11/2023 - 29/03/2024 01/10/2024
05/04/2021 - 27/08/2021 6-12 week
WPL Implementation WPL 'Charging Commences'
WPL Feasibility Study Public Consultation

01/04/2024 - 27/09/2024
09/08/2022 - 29/10/2022 30/05/2023 - 29/10/2023
WPL 'Go Live'
Outline Business Secretary of State - No Charging
Case Production Approval for WPL

Page 276
05/04/2021 01/01/2022 01/01/2023 01/01/2024 31/10/2024

01/11/2022 - 30/10/2023 01/11/2023 - 31/10/2024
01/10/2021 - 29/10/2022
Stage Two - Stage Three -
Stage One -
Public Consultation and Approval Implementation and Operation
Scheme Development and
Outline Business Case

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 60
7.6 Appendix F: Governance and Project Team Structure
Recommended BCC WPL Project Structure for Stage One
One City Transport Board
Mayor/ The Economy & Skills Board
Deputy Mayor The Environment Board
Meet Quarterly WECA The Health & Wellbeing Board
Directors The Homes and Communities Board
Head of City Transport

WPL Steering Group
Inward Investment
Head of City Transport
Economic Development
Principal Transport Planner
Meet every 6 weeks Traffic Management Development
Comms Lead
Public Transport
NCC Advisors
Transport Strategy
WPL Project Manager

Lead Manager

Page 277
Meet weekly

Project Manager
Project Support

Internal External

Economic Commu nicatio ns Pro ject
Leg al Finance Par liamentary Transport
Development Offi cer Manag ement
Age nts Consultants
Consultants

Info rma tion , Busine ss
WPL Pack age NCC WPL Economic Imp roveme nt
JLTP L ead Pro cure me nt Govern ance &
Lead Officer Sup port Consultants District and
Risk
Busine ss Foru m

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 61
7.8 Appendix G: Stakeholder Radar

BCC Employees
(4.11)

Directors/Head of Services & Managers
(3.11)

Councillors
(3.12)
Executive Director –
Growth & Region
Green
(2.12) BCC External
Organisations
(3.41) Corporate Leadership Communications/Press The Federation
Board Office of Small Business
(2.11) (2.13) (3.21)
Local Lobbyist
Groups Chamber of
- For Commerce (2.41) Employers Employers
- Against L/M (3.25)
(3.42) Local Media 1Deputy Mayor x2 + Top 5/10
(2.42) (1.12) & (1.13) (2.21)
Residents Visitors/
One City Boards National Media
NHS (3.22) Conurbation
- Economy & Skills (2.43)
(2.22) (4.21)
- Environment Mayor
Public Health
- Health & WECA Mayor (1.11)
(2.44)

N
(1.42)
G C
BCC Wellbeing
V
DfT
Trade Unions (3.43) West of England (1.41)
Specialist High
(4.41) Combined Authority
E-Mobility End Businesses University of West
Operators (2.45) (2.23) of England
(3.44) Business West One City (3.23)
(2.48) Transport Board University of Bristol
Property
(1.31) (2.24)
Developers Destination Bristol
in Central Area (2.47)
Employees/ Trade
(3.45)
Unions
MPs (3.24)
Campaign Groups (2.46)
(3.46) Public Transport Operators (Bus Infrastructure (2.32) Business Improvement
companies) Districts
Equality Groups (3.25)
(2.31)
(3.47)

Joint Local
Transport Plan (JLTP) (3.31)

National
Transport Groups (3.32)

Level Meaning
V Vital to engage
N Necessary to engage
G Good to have
engaged
C Courtesy to inform

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page 278 P a g e | 62
7.9 Appendix H: 2X2 Power/Influence by Interest in WPL
Matrix

High 1.11
1.12
1.41 1.13
2.46 3.41
Influential Observers: Key Players:
Keep Satisfied 2.11 2.12 Engage Closely
2.42 2.44 1.31
1.42
2.43 3.12
3.42 2.31
Power/
3.46 3.22 3.24 2.48 2.13
Influence
2.45 2.41
3.24
3.11 3.23 2.24
2.23 2.21
3.21 3.25
3.45 2.32 2.22 3.31
2.47
Spectators: Active Players:
3.32
Monitor 3.44 Keep Informed
4.21 3.47 3.43
4.41
4.11
Low

Low Interest in High
WPL

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page 279 P a g e | 63
7.10 Appendix I: Risk Register

CONSTITUENT RISKS TO BE MANAGED
Latest
Opening
Threat
Threat
Constituent Risk Description Risk Management Counter Measures & Actions Status Owner Level
Level e.g.
e.g.
2x4=8
2x4=8

Political Climate

As the UK moves out of the transitional period and into a post- The impacts of Brexit are still emerging and there is the
Brexit economy, there could be negative impacts on employers in possibility that the COVID-19 pandemic is also masking the
the short to medium term. Any negative impacts on employers impacts. Engagement held with Bristol City Council officers
may reduce the political will for a WPL scheme in Bristol, which in indicated that they accept that businesses may seek to use
turn could see the development of a scheme being delayed or Brexit/COVID-19 as a reason to avoid/delay the need to

Page 280
even postponed. deal with poor air quality and the issue of congestion. A
1 3 4 12 Open AC 3 4 12
strong Stakeholder Management Strategy and
Communications Plan with key messages that are
supported by facts will help Bristol City Council to put
forward the need to tackle poor air quality and congestion
now more than ever.

The unknown impact of Brexit on the government and local The impacts of Brexit are still emerging and there is the
authorities could cause delays in the short to medium term plans possibility that the COVID-19 pandemic is also masking the
to implement a WPL scheme in Bristol, which impacts the target impacts. A post-Brexit and post-COVID-19 economy could
2 3 5 15 Open AC 3 5 15
October 2024 “go live” date. mean that there are grants and funding available from the
government, which strengthens the case for a WPL.

The awarding of grants from the government to local authorities The government has promised local authorities additional
for sustainable transport projects/transport infrastructure plans money for public transport infrastructure (buses) and active
could pose a threat to the likelihood of approvals for future WPL travel. However, the grants will not be enough to fund the
3 schemes. 3 4 12 future sustainable transport projects for local authorities. Open AC 2 3 6
As a result, schemes such as a WPL will be viewed as a
positive as it will show the government evidence of match
funding.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 64
The JLTP5 is not yet drafted or approved, therefore any delays in The current JLTP4 was seen to not go far enough
the approval of the plan could undermine the DfT sign-off of a regarding tackling climate change. It is envisaged that the
future WPL scheme. JLTP5, which is expected to be signed off by mid-2023, will
4 3 4 12 look to showcase Bristol's vision to be a carbon neutral city Open AC 2 3 6
by 2030. It is felt by Bristol City Council officers that the
JLTP5 will not be a threat to the sign-off of a WPL scheme.

There is a risk that the WPL scheme or WPL Package for Bristol Bristol City Council officers will contribute towards the
are not included in the JLTP5; this would undermine or reduce the development of the JLTP5 to ensure that the WPL scheme
5 scope of the WPL scheme as the ring-fenced funding is a legal 3 4 12 and supporting WPL Package for Bristol are included. Open AC 2 3 6
requirement under the Transport Act 2000.

Page 281
The 2021 elections saw a new Labour Mayor elected for the West Bristol City Council officers will ensure a close working
of England. While it is early days, there is a risk that differing relationship between the policital leaders and seek an
priorities between the West of England Mayor and Mayor of Bristol agreement in advance of the work packages that are to be
could see a delay to a potential WPL scheme, due to differences funded. The WPL will remain a Bristol City Council function
over the WPL package and operation of infrastructure funded by and not a WECA function. However, it will be key to get an
6 a Bristol WPL. The new WECA Mayor will have a higher profile 3 3 9 agreement on the work packages that are to be funded in Open AC 2 3 6
than his predecessor, therefore will want to be seen as being order to tackle congestion, improve air quality and help
involved in delivering sustainable transport improvements across solve the WECA aims of regeneration.
the WECA.

The national consensus is that Bristol is a “well-off” region, While the region is externally seen as less in need of
therefore there is uncertainty regarding the level of support from levelling up than other areas, it is evident that Bristol has
7 central government which Bristol City Council will receive for the 4 4 16 significant areas of deprivation that require investment in Open AC 4 4 16
WPL project and transport projects in general. transport infrastructure to level up across the region.

Project Resources

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 65
If Bristol City Council does not recruit or faces delays in procuring There is a common activity (restructure) taking place at
the resources recommended in the project structure, then there Bristol City Council. This process will review project
could be significant delays to the project which would put the management resourcing and seek to ensure appropriate
8 provisional target October 2024 “go live” date at a high risk of 3 5 15 provision is made for all projects. Bristol City Council Open AC 3 5 15
failure. recently went into contract with a strategic partner, Arcadis.
This will also enable use of additional resources as
required.
There is insufficient understanding and appreciation of the amount Consider using VOA/business rates databases to gather
of work and resources required for Stage One of the WPL Route detailed data on employment “make-up” within Bristol.
9 Map e.g. for studies/data etc. and the necessity for this 3 5 15 Open AC 3 5 15
information to inform the OBC, communications activity etc.

If key Bristol City Council officers move on, the WPL project could Bristol City Council acknowledges this is always going to
be delayed due to loss of knowledge transfer, expertise and be a risk but is not deemed as a high risk.
10 4 4 16 Open AC 2 4 8
continuity.

If Bristol City Council do not engage expert WPL advisors in some Bristol City Council will be engaging with consultants who
capacity during Stage One, then they could face increased costs have proven experience of delivering and operating WPL

Page 282
11 and timeframes during the scheme development phase. The 3 5 15 schemes. Open AC 1 4 4
quality of the scheme offer could also be reduced.

Bristol City Council not acquiring or being delayed in engaging Bristol City Council will be engaging with the relevant
12 with the appropriate external specialist consultancy support that 3 4 12 specialists to ensure that there are no delays to the Open AC 2 4 8
will be necessary for the successful delivery of Stage One. successful delivery of Stage One.
The time taken to procure and secure the appropriate resources Bristol City Council officers will be holding early
for the WPL Project Team means that there may be a delay in the engagement with the Bristol City Council procurement
13 transfer of knowledge, understanding, scope and details of 3 4 12 team to identify issues and resolve any potential problems Open AC 2 4 8
delivering a WPL scheme; leading to progress in delivering Stage and delays.
One workstreams being delayed.
If Bristol City Council does not ensure that an updated parking Bristol City Council officers agree that urgent parking data
survey is commissioned prior to or early on in Stage One, then the must be prioritised on the Central Core and some on the
financial modelling and ultimately the OBC will not be robust and Expanded Central Core.
14 3 4 12 Open AC 2 4 8
will be liable to challenge.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 66
Communications

If key internal stakeholders are not adequately briefed and "on Bristol City Council officers will prepare briefing documents
message" and inaccurate information is put into the public for key internal stakeholders to ensure that they are
15 domain, then the development of the WPL scheme could be 3 4 12 adequately briefed and "on message" at all times. Open AC 2 2 4
inhibited in certain areas and there could be revenue implications.

A lack of communications activity with the appropriate Bristol City Council has internal communications
stakeholders will result in delays to the workstreams and project, specialists in mind for a WPL project.
16 as well as misinformation regarding the project. There is a need 3 4 12 Open AC 2 3 6
for an experienced Communications Officer.

There is a risk that if a communications strategy is not in place Bristol City Council will be using the Feasibility Study
with consistent and detailed proactive and reactive key messages, Report and appendices produced by Nottingham City
then inconsistencies with information released by Bristol City Council to develop their communications strategy.
17 3 4 12 Open AC 2 3 6
Council into the public domain could result in misinformation,
undermining the integrity of the scheme.

Page 283
It is essential to have a key figure(s) to front and represent the Adam Crowther will be providing an update on the WPL to
WPL scheme proposal. Any changes in this key figure(s) will have Councillor Don Alexander, Cabinet member for Transport.
18 a detrimental impact on the promotion and reputation of the 3 5 15 Open AC 3 3 9
scheme, especially in Stages One and Two.

Any delays to an approved vision outlining the benefits of the WPL The Bristol City Council WPL Project Team will link the
scheme could see increased objections from employers, resulting WPL deliverables to the One City Plan and communicate
19 in negative media coverage and making it more difficult to gain 3 4 12 into the public domain. Open AC 2 3 6
scheme approval, particularly in the context of the Red Tape
Challenge review to address key business concerns.
Any delays to an approved vision outlining the benefits of the WPL The Stakeholder Management Strategy and
scheme could see delayed support and less vocal backing from Communications Plan workstream identifies a suite of
environmental groups during the informal engagement/public products to be developed for target groups. Engagement
consultation process, making it harder for Bristol City Council to with the environmental lobby as early as practicable is
20 3 3 9 Open AC 2 2 4
gather wider support. recommended. Bristol City Council officers will be
engaging with the environmental lobby as a priority once
all the necessary requirements required for the OBC have
been fulfilled.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 67
Adherence to the Nottingham Model

Nottingham City Council are in a unique position as the only local Bristol City Council recognise the need to follow the
authority to have developed, delivered and operated a WPL fundamental building blocks of Nottingham City Council's
scheme. If Bristol City Council choose not to follow the WPL scheme and are cognisant of the availability of advice
fundamental building blocks of Nottingham’s WPL scheme, then and experience from Nottingham City Council’s
21 any Bristol WPL scheme is at higher risk of legal challenge, 3 5 15 practitioners as to how Bristol’s scheme would benefit from Open AC 2 2 4
leading to increased costs for further scheme design and potential Nottingham's learning to reduce risk, optimise expenditure
delays to the delivery timescales and the target October 2024 “go and achieve the target delivery date.
live” date.
Bristol City Council does not identify and allocate the necessary Bristol City Council officers will communicate the Feasibility
funding for the internal/external resources that are required to Study Report via briefings to key officers/politicians. The
commence the delivery of Stage One and associated engagement with key officers and politicians will allow the
workstreams. Bristol City Council officers to identify potential costs,
timescales and risks

Page 284

22 3 5 15 Open AC 3 4 12

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 68
COVID-19

The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has had an effect on the The effect of COVID-19 on businesses and their ability to
ability for local businesses to operate and their performance. The operate is still unknown. Nottingham City Council can
end of the extended furlough scheme could see some businesses provide data based on the licensing behaviour of its
reduce operations leading to a smaller number of liable employers employers that are licenced for the WPL scheme. It is felt
within a future Bristol City Council WPL scheme area. There is a that in the short-medium term, there will not be the same
possibility that this could reduce the total number of LWPPs. levels of provision as pre-COVID levels. The post-COVID
working arrangements will need to be reflected in the
financial model. The furlough scheme now requires a
23 3 4 12 contribution from employers, however the whole scheme Open AC 3 4 12
has been extended until 30/09/21 and therefore the impact
will not be known for some time. Bristol City Council is
considering a target October 2024 “go live” date - it is
expected a clearer picture will be visible by then. Bristol is
seeing an increase in traffic volumes. The availability of

Page 285
other modes of transport delivered as a result of a WPL
scheme is a positive.

The outbreak of COVID-19 has seen an increase in the number The situation is dynamic and the medium-long term
of employees working from home. The ability and practicality of implications of COVID-19 on the provision of LWPPs is as
some employees being able to work from home could see yet unknown. It is felt likely that there will not be the same
businesses downsize their office space and in turn reduce the levels of provision as pre-COVID and this will need to be
number of LWPPs they provide. reflected in the financial model. Nottingham City Council
can provide data based on the licensing behaviour of its
employers as a result of COVID-19.
24 3 4 12 It is yet to be seen what the impact of COVID-19 is on some Open AC 3 4 12
businesses. The new post-Covid working models are
unknown, therefore Bristol City Council will be monitoring
to gain a clearer picture. Bristol City Council officers agree
that the best reference point is the Nottingham WPL
Licensing System and how this is being impacted.

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 69
Further clarity is required on the vision of a WPL in the context of The situation is dynamic and the medium-long term
enhanced public transport plans (S-M-L). Additionally, the implications of COVID-19 on the use of public transport is
prevalence of social distancing measures until the “new normal” as yet unknown. Whilst there will be a short-medium term
could lead to concerns about increased investment in public reduction in the patronage of public transport, it is felt likely
transport infrastructure. that pre-COVID levels will be seen at some future stage
and public confidence will return. The government
published a Roadmap to Recovery with an end to social
25 2 4 8 distancing on 19th July 2021 and return of remaining Open AC 2 4 8
industries. Public transport patronage is to be monitored by
Bristol City Council. The government’s extensive vaccine
programme rollout is ongoing. The ongoing risk posed by
COVID-19 variants, e.g. at present the Indian/Delta variant
appears to be prevalent and the impact on further lockdown
restrictions in Bristol should be monitored.

The long-term impacts of social distancing on public transport The vaccination program is underway and will be ongoing.
usage/capacity is as yet unknown and should be kept under As the restrictions begin to ease, it is expected that more
review during scheme development. There is a risk that there people will return to the workplace and public transport

Page 286
could be reduced patronage on public transport, which could usage will increase too.
26 3 4 12 Open AC 3 4 12
impact upon the proposed WPL package. The WPL vision may
therefore need to be reviewed.

The economic impact felt by S-M-L businesses from the effects of Bristol City Council will be monitoring the recovery of
COVID-19 could lead to increased non-cooperation as part of the businesses and a sensitive approach will be adopted.
data collection during the OSPA, which undermines the financial Bristol City Council will be undertaking proactive
27 model and the OBC. 3 3 9 stakeholder engagement when engaging with businesses, Open AC 3 3 9
to ease fears.

The long-term effects on physical and mental health as a result of Bristol City Council officers will monitor the situation.
the COVID-19 pandemic could lead to commuters being more
28 reliant on cars as opposed to using public transport. 4 4 16 Open AC 4 3 12

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 70
Other

Bus Back Better strategy – if Bristol City Council receives Bristol City Council officers feel that receiving a significant
significant funding then the scope of the WPL Package could be amount of funding from the Bus Back Better strategy could
reduced. If less funding is required for the WPL scheme then it make it easier to implement a WPL scheme. There will
29 could put the project and scheme in doubt. 3 4 12 never be enough money for the city's transport needs. WPL AC 2 3 6
revenue would still be required for a mass transit system,
as outlined in the One City Plan.

The implementation and direct impact of a CAZ could see air The CAZ is not expected to significantly reduce traffic
quality levels reduce significantly. As a result, there may be no volumes and is not expected to have a significant impact
need for a WPL scheme. on the requirement for a WPL scheme. The potential issue
30 3 5 15 Open AC 2 2 4
of "double charging" of vehicle users i.e. pay the CAZ and
a WPL charge by their employer, will offset the WPL

Page 287
liability.
If Bristol City Council do not have an effective procurement Bristol City Council opts for a middle ground for projects
strategy in place to commission studies and bring in expert such a WPL. They will use a mix of internal resources and
consultants, they could face delays in initiating and completing the consultants, as appropriate. Bristol City Council has a
31 4 4 16 Open AC 2 3 6
WPL Route Map to develop and implement a WPL scheme. strategic partner which could see a greater use of
consultants. Bristol City Council also has a strategic
partner for procurement.
The Bristol City Council desire and justification to develop a WPL Bristol City Council officers are confident that initially a
scheme may be reduced if the potential number of places is less Central Core scheme can be delivered, with a view to
32 than the estimates of the Atkins Study. 4 4 16 expanding in the future. Open AC 3 3 9

If the Secretary of State for Transport rejects Leicester City Bristol City Council officers will monitor the situation.
Council’s WPL FBC then this could have a bearing and impact on
33 the Bristol WPL scheme development. 4 4 16 Open AC 4 4 16

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol P a g e | 71
7.11 Appendix J: Recommendations

Reference Page(s) Recommendation
Review relevant economic, transport, congestion, air quality, deprivation and social
R1 11
inclusion/exclusion studies and ensure that they are up to date
Assess the need to commission new studies where information in current studies is out
R2 11
of date
Carry out an OSPA to understand the “make-up” of employers and form a baseline
R3 11
dataset for scheme development
Commission Nottingham City Council to conduct a desktop parking exercise using
R4 12 multiple regression analysis and based on Nottingham’s live WPL Licensing System, to
estimate how many LWPPs Bristol may have
Model the transport, financial and economic elements of the WPL scheme to illustrate
R5 12
how it would operate and fund future transport projects
R6 13 Introduce a risk management strategy and regularly update the Risk Register
R7 13 Draft a WPL Scheme Order
Introduce and progress the displaced parking workstream to tackle the potential
R8 13
displacement of commuter parking
Consider the introduction of a car park management scheme at Bristol City Council
R9 13
premises, where commuter parking occurs
Outline the transport package that will be funded by the revenue generated from a WPL
R10 14
scheme
Develop a detailed public consultation programme including specified timeframes,
R11 16
activities and methodology
Carry out a robust public consultation programme to engage and consult with all key
R12 17
stakeholders
Monitor the new working arrangements and commuter travel behaviour as a return to a
R13 22-23 “new normal” begins, following the lifting of lockdown restrictions as a result of the
COVID-19 pandemic
R14 24 Regularly review and update the Milestones and Dependencies Timeline
Conduct a “feet on the ground” OSPA that factors in any questions from the previous
R15 26
Atkins Study
Identify and include any existing displaced commuter parking counts in the WPP
R16 26
estimations (for example, on-street parking around industrial estates)
Review the list of sites visited by Atkins and cross-reference with VOA data, in order to
R17 27
begin categorising employers by size and industry
R18 28 Conduct further research into the cost of parking provided by private companies
Conduct a survey in Stage One to further understand commuter behaviour across the
R29 29
Bristol region
Follow the Governance and Project Team Structure outlined in Appendix F and Section
R20 31-36
5.4
Create a Stakeholder Management Strategy and Communications Plan to identify
R21 37-44
stakeholders and ensure that their interest levels are maintained or increased
Monitor and regularly update the dynamic Risk Register document, with risks that are
R22 45-49 dealt with being closed, new risks being identified as the scheme develops and adequate
mitigation implemented

V2.0 Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol Page 288 P a g e | 72
Key Contacts:
Jason Gooding
Head of Parking, Fleet and Transport Operations
Email: jason.gooding@nottinghamcity.gov.uk
Nigel Hallam
WPL Service Manager
Email: nigel.hallam@nottinghamcity.gov.uk

Copyright © 2021 by Nottingham City Council

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, transmitted in any form or
by any means, including photography, recording or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the
prior written permission of Nottingham City Council, or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms
agreed with the appropriate reprographics rights organisations.

Permission requests should be sent to Jason Gooding, Head of Parking, Fleet and Transport Operations,
Nottingham City Council, Loxley House, Station Street, Nottingham, NG2 3NG.

Full acknowledgement of the author and source must be given.

Page 289
Equality Impact Assessment [version 2.12]

Title: Workplace Parking Levy – Stage One Development and Outline Business Case
☒ Policy ☐ Strategy ☐ Function ☐ Service ☐ New
☐ Other [please state] ☒ Already exists / review ☐ Changing
Directorate: Growth and Regeneration Lead Officer name: Laura Gosling
Service Area: City Transport Lead Officer role: Transport Programme
Manager

Step 1: What do we want to do?
The purpose of an Equality Impact Assessment is to assist decision makers in understanding the impact of proposals
as part of their duties under the Equality Act 2010. Detailed guidance to support completion can be found here
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com).
This assessment should be started at the beginning of the process by someone with a good knowledge of the
proposal and service area, and sufficient influence over the proposal. It is good practice to take a team approach to
completing the equality impact assessment. Please contact the Equality and Inclusion Team early for advice and
feedback.

1.1 What are the aims and objectives/purpose of this proposal?
Briefly explain the purpose of the proposal and why it is needed. Describe who it is aimed at and the intended aims /
outcomes. Where known also summarise the key actions you plan to undertake. Please use plain English, avoiding
jargon and acronyms. Equality Impact Assessments are viewed by a wide range of people including decision-makers
and the wider public.
The Committee Report outlines Bristol City Council’s proposed approach to developing a Workplace Parking Levy
(WPL) scheme and associated Outline Business Case.

A WPL is an annual charge paid to the Local Transport Authority by employers on the workplace parking spaces
they provide. Employers have the option to pass this cost on to their employees or pay the charge themselves.
The aim is to encourage employers to manage the number of workplace parking spaces they provide, whilst
promoting and encouraging the use of sustainable transport

A WPL forms a potential part of Bristol City Council’s transport strategy and is outlined in Joint Local Transport
Plan 4 and the Bristol Transport Strategy as a key demand management measure aimed at tackling congestion,
particularly at peak times, and as a means of providing significant additional revenue for transport improvements
across the city. The introduction of a WPL would help discourage car commuting and help increase the use of
alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public transport which would in turn, improve people’s health and
the local environment. A WPL would also provide significant additional revenue for transport improvements
across the city.

The powers to introduce a Workplace Parking Levy are contained in the Transport Act 2000. By law, net proceeds
from a Workplace Parking Levy are only available for the purpose of directly or indirectly facilitating achievement
of local transport policies and objectives.

Page 290
OFFICIAL
1.2 Who will the proposal have the potential to affect?
☒ Bristol City Council workforce ☒ Service users ☒ The wider community
☒ Commissioned services ☒ City partners / Stakeholder organisations
Additional comments:

1.3 Will the proposal have an equality impact?
Could the proposal affect access levels of representation or participation in a service, or does it have the potential to
change e.g. quality of life: health, education, or standard of living etc.?
If ‘No’ explain why you are sure there will be no equality impact, then skip steps 2-4 and request review by Equality
and Inclusion Team.
If ‘Yes’ complete the rest of this assessment, or if you plan to complete the assessment at a later stage please state
this clearly here and request review by the Equality and Inclusion Team.

☒ Yes ☐ No [please select]

Step 2: What information do we have?

2.1 What data or evidence is there which tells us who is, or could be affected?
Please use this section to demonstrate an understanding of who could be affected by the proposal. Include general
population data where appropriate, and information about people who will be affected with particular reference to
protected and other relevant characteristics: How we measure equality and diversity (bristol.gov.uk)
Use one row for each evidence source and say which characteristic(s) it relates to. You can include a mix of
qualitative and quantitative data e.g. from national or local research, available data or previous consultations and
engagement activities.
Outline whether there is any over or under representation of equality groups within relevant services - don't forget
to benchmark to the local population where appropriate. Links to available data and reports are here Data, statistics
and intelligence (sharepoint.com). See also: Bristol Open Data (Quality of Life, Census etc.); Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA); Ward Statistical Profiles.

For workforce / management of change proposals you will need to look at the diversity of the affected teams using
available evidence such as HR Analytics: Power BI Reports (sharepoint.com) which shows the diversity profile of
council teams and service areas. Identify any over or under-representation compared with Bristol economically
active citizens for different characteristics. Additional sources of useful workforce evidence include the Employee
Staff Survey Report and Stress Risk Assessment

Data / Evidence Source Summary of what this tells us
[Include a reference where known]
Bristol City Council WPL Feasibility Report (2011) The study undertaken by Atkins in 2011 provided high
level estimates of the number of parking spaces that
could be encompassed in a WPL scheme based three
different defined areas in Bristol. These range from a
lower estimate of 8,600 parking spaces for a smaller
central zone to an upper estimate of 57,000 for a
scheme covering the entire city. The WPL Feasibility
Study undertaken by Nottingham City Council in 2021
notes that without undertaking a more detailed and

Page 291
OFFICIAL
up to date audit of spaces, the accuracy of these
figures is likely to be low.

71 % of respondents think that air quality and traffic
Bristol Quality of Life Survey 2024/25 pollution is a problem locally which suggests that
there is majority support for initiatives that seek to
reduce the impacts of car use in the city.

83% of people think that traffic congestion is a
problem locally which suggests broad support for
measures that reduce levels of traffic in the city. In the
previous years’ survey this percentage was lower,
suggesting local people feel congestion has got worse
since 2023.

Based on data from the previous Quality of Life Survey
in 2023/24, 36% of respondents state that they drive
to work (2% car share) which suggests, depending on
the coverage of the WPL scheme, that a significant
number of people would be impacted by the
proposal.

The Quality of Life survey suggests older people
(40.6%), carers (43.5%), single parents (50%) and those
living in the 10% most deprived areas (41.7%) are
significantly more likely than Bristol average (36.7%) to
drive to work. Disabled people (25.8%) and younger
people between 16-24 (26.8%) are less likely to drive
to work.

There are also significant disparities in the extent to
which people in Bristol find lack of transport options
prevents them leaving their house when they want to
- in particular for young people, Disabled people, Black
Asian and minoritised communities, LGBTQ+, carers
and those living in the most deprived areas.
NOMIS Bristol has approximately 18,330 registered businesses
Nomis - Official Census and Labour Market Statistics with a higher proportion of small (10 to 49 employees)
(nomisweb.co.uk) and large (250+ employees) employers than the South
West regional average. More work is required to
understand the allocation of parking spaces across
these businesses as it is likely that many (particularly
among micro and small businesses) will have no
allocated parking and therefore will not be impacted
by the scheme.
Travel to Work Survey Bristol, March 2025 Bristol’s Travel to Work Survey results reveal that 31%
of employees travel to work by car (with an additional
6% car sharing). On average, people driving to work
travel in 3.2 days per week and travel an average
distance of 35 miles a day. The latter statistic
demonstrates that many commuters are travelling into
Bristol from outside of the local authority boundary
and that the WPL will have impacts beyond Bristol.

The survey notes that there is a relatively equal split
between men (30%) and women (32%) who drive to
Page 292
OFFICIAL
work. (It should be noted that the percentages don’t
add up to 100% because of the option ‘Prefer not to
say’)

In line with the Quality of Life Survey, the Travel to
Work Survey highlights that people 50+ (39%) are
more likely to drive to work than younger people
under 30 (21%).

The survey identifies that people driving to work are
more likely to be from a white ethnic background
(33%) than an ethnic minority group (24%)

Unlike the Quality of Life Survey, the Travel to Work
Survey suggests that an almost equal proportion of
Disabled (32%) and non-Disabled people (31%) travel
to work by car.

Bristol Walking and Cycling Index (2023) The Bristol Walking and Cycling Index, which is
updated every 2 years, polls a representative example
of Bristol’s population (circa 1,000 respondents). The
survey reveals data that would support the aims and
objectives of a WPL scheme:

• 49% of people want to walk, wheel or cycle
more
• 35% of people want to take public transport
more
• 29% of people want to drive less

In addition to the report notes that 64% of people
want more investment in walking and wheeling, 58%
more investment in cycling, 83% more investment in
public transport and only 23% more investment in
driving.

Global Traffic Scorecard | INRIX Global Traffic Rankings Congestion costs the UK economy £7.8 billion annually
(2024), up 11% from 2023.

Bristol drivers lose an average of 65 hours each year to
congestion, making the city the second most
congested in the UK, after London (101 hours) and
ahead of Leeds (60 hours) and Manchester (61 hours).
Bristol traffic report | TomTom Traffic Index In 2024, Bristol recorded an average congestion level
of 34%, which is 2 percentage points higher than 2023,
indicating worsening traffic conditions. The average
travel time for a 6-mile journey was 22 minutes and 1
second, up by 9 seconds from the previous year. Over
the year, drivers spent an additional 87 hours in rush-
hour traffic, equivalent to 3 days and 15 hours, which
is 5 hours and 21 minutes more than in 2023.
Additional comments:

Page 293
OFFICIAL
2.2 Do you currently monitor relevant activity by the following protected characteristics?
☒ Age ☒ Disability ☒ Gender Reassignment
☒ Marriage and Civil Partnership ☒ Pregnancy/Maternity ☒ Race
☒ Religion or Belief ☒ Sex ☒ Sexual Orientation

2.3 Are there any gaps in the evidence base?
Where there are gaps in the evidence, or you don’t have enough information about some equality groups, include an
equality action to find out in section 4.2 below. This doesn’t mean that you can’t complete the assessment without
the information, but you need to follow up the action and if necessary, review the assessment later. If you are
unable to fill in the gaps, then state this clearly with a justification.
For workforce related proposals all relevant characteristics may not be included in HR diversity reporting (e.g.
pregnancy/maternity). For smaller teams diversity data may be redacted. A high proportion of not known/not
disclosed may require an action to address under-reporting.

A lot of relevant data exists on the commuting habits of Bristol’s residents, but the following gaps remain:

• Whether different groups currently pay for parking or are offered free parking at their workplace.
• An accurate picture of the number of employee parking bays that may form part of the scheme.
• The ability of employers and employees to meet additional costs.

2.4 How have you involved communities and groups that could be affected?
You will nearly always need to involve and consult with internal and external stakeholders during your assessment.
The extent of the engagement will depend on the nature of the proposal or change. This should usually include
individuals and groups representing different relevant protected characteristics. Please include details of any
completed engagement and consultation and how representative this had been of Bristol’s diverse communities.
Include the main findings of any engagement and consultation in Section 2.1 above.

If you are managing a workforce change process or restructure please refer to Managing a change process or
restructure (sharepoint.com) for advice on consulting with employees etc. Relevant stakeholders for engagement
about workforce changes may include e.g. staff-led groups and trades unions as well as affected staff.

Presently only a Feasibility Study has been undertaken in relation to the WPL scheme. However, this outlines in
detail the key stakeholders that need to be involved and sets out a recommended approach to consulting with
them. Further engagement is planned as part of the development of this OBC.

2.5 How will engagement with stakeholders continue?
Explain how you will continue to engage with stakeholders throughout the course of planning and delivery. Please
describe where more engagement and consultation is required and set out how you intend to undertake it. Include
any targeted work to seek the views of under-represented groups. If you do not intend to undertake it, please set
out your justification. You can ask the Equality and Inclusion Team for help in targeting particular groups.

The scheme has been subject to an initial Feasibility Study which outlines a Stakeholder Management Strategy for
future stages of project development. This highlights the need for extensive public consultation as well as
delivering a communications plan which sets out how key stakeholders (e.g. employers) will be kept updated and
informed at key stages of the project. The next stage of development will advance the stakeholder strategy and
communication plan, and any scheme will be subject to public consultation and committee sign off before
delivery.

Page 294
OFFICIAL
Step 3: Who might the proposal impact?
Analysis of impacts must be rigorous. Please demonstrate your analysis of any impacts of the proposal in this
section, referring to evidence you have gathered above and the characteristics protected by the Equality Act 2010.
Also include details of existing issues for particular groups that you are aware of and are seeking to address or
mitigate through this proposal. See detailed guidance documents for advice on identifying potential impacts etc.
Equality Impact Assessments (EqIA) (sharepoint.com)

3.1 Does the proposal have any potentially adverse impacts on people based on their
protected or other relevant characteristics?
Consider sub-categories and how people with combined characteristics (e.g. young women) might have particular
needs or experience particular kinds of disadvantage.
Where mitigations indicate a follow-on action, include this in the ‘Action Plan’ Section 4.2 below.
GENERAL COMMENTS (highlight any potential issues that might impact all or many groups)
The introduction of a WPL will have a range of impacts for different protected characteristic groups but the full
details of these impacts will not be clear until the necessary development work has been undertaken to
understand the size, scope and pricing strategy of the scheme. Therefore, this EQIA will need to be continuously
reviewed and updated as the project progresses.
A final decision on any WPL scheme will need to be taken by Committee at which point an updated EQIA will be
provided.
The WPL scheme is still at an early stage of development with key details such as pricing, scope and potential
exemptions not yet determined. As such, this EQIA is proportional to the level of detail currently available.
The analysis of the data suggests there is high levels of support for measures that improve conditions for walking,
cycling and public transport and for securing more investment for these modes. Residents want to drive less and
walk, cycle, and use public transport more.
Where certain equality groups may rely more on driving to work due to accessibility or safety barriers on public
transport, this impact may be partially mitigated through investment in public transport infrastructure
improvements.
The scheme is likely to have an impact on a significant number of commuters who drive to work and of that group
it is not unreasonable to suggest that people on lower incomes will likely find it harder to meet additional costs if
their employer passes the cost of the WPL scheme on to them.
The analysis finds that older people make up a greater proportion of people who travel to work by car and
therefore they are more likely to be impacted by the scheme than other groups.
Whilst a levy would be for the employer not the employee, there is a strong possibility that charges would be
passed on directly to employees or the overall number of car parking spaces reduced - so impacts below have
been assessed on that basis.
Disabled people who hold Blue Badges are likely to be exempt, but disabled employees without a badge and those
with mobility needs could still be affected if parking is reduced. Night and shift workers, who often rely on cars
due to limited public transport at unsocial hours, may also face disproportionate impacts.
In the council’s cumulative equality impact assessment for the 2025-26 Budget, we recognise that increased
charges and levies could disproportionately affect small businesses and the local voluntary and community sector.
This impact is especially significant for organisations led by or supporting equality groups, as higher costs may
prevent smaller providers from continuing to offer equitable services to Bristol’s diverse population. As part of the
feasibility study, we will evaluate potential indirect impacts on specific users and assess whether discretionary
concessions for voluntary and community sector or equality-led stakeholders are appropriate and feasible.
A previous scoping study identified that concessions could be made for specific groups, such as blue badge
holders, small businesses, and NHS facilities etc.
Analysis at this stage is limited to consideration of the direct impact of a levy on employees and has not
considered any potential additional pressure on on-street parking, as the levy would apply to the parking space
Page 295
OFFICIAL
itself rather than the vehicle. The project plan includes a study to identify any potential displaced commuter
parking.

PROTECTED CHARACTERISTICS
Age: Young People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Younger people are less likely to be reliant on a car to get to work. The reduction in
congestion and re-investment of fees into improved public transport options will
provide a disproportionate benefit to this group. Improved access to transport schemes
and initiatives will help ensure this group have a good start in life.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Age: Older People Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: This group is more likely to be driven to work and as such is likely to be
disproportionately impacted by the proposal if employers decide to pass on costs to
them. That said, the Quality-of-Life survey 2024/25 shows that the number of people
from the 50+ age group that state that they ‘find it difficult to manage financially’ is
much lower than the Bristol average.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Disability Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: A WPL scheme could potentially have an adverse impact on Disabled employees who
need a car in order to maintain a quality of life and access to employment. A WPL could
also adversely impact a Disabled person who may need to incorporate other tasks into
their commute to work (trip chaining) such as attending necessary appointments in
order to maintain their health.
Mitigations: Consider exception for all Disabled Employees. The Blue Badge scheme may offer
partial mitigations for those Disabled employees who have them, and some employers
may already have designated spaces for Disabled People.
Sex Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Women are statistically more likely to hold caring responsibilities for children and older
adults and would therefore be disproportionately affected if they need to incorporate
other tasks into their commute to work (trip chaining) such as the school run, caring for
or helping with tasks for older adults
Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
employees with caring responsibilities.
Sexual orientation Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Quality of Life survey data suggests a higher than average proportion of LGBTQ+ people
in Bristol find lack of transport options prevents them leaving their house when they
want to.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Pregnancy / Maternity Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: As above, those with caring responsibilities may need to incorporate other tasks into
the commute to work (trip chaining) Pregnant employees may be more dependent on
having their own transport for pre-natal appointments or if they find public transport
inaccessible
Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
pregnant employees.
Gender reassignment Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Potential impacts: Quality of Life survey data suggests a higher than average proportion of LGBTQ+ people
in Bristol find lack of transport options prevents them leaving their house when they
want to.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Race Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic households in the UK are more likely to be in deep
poverty and experience higher levels of material deprivation. As such, if employers pass

Page 296
OFFICIAL
on WPL scheme costs to these groups they may find it harder to meet these additional
costs.
Mitigations: None identified at this stage – to be considered in feasibility study
Religion or Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
Belief
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
Marriage & Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☐ No ☒
civil partnership
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:
OTHER RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS
Socio-Economic Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
(deprivation)
Potential impacts: The Quality-of-Life Survey suggests that people living in areas of deprivation are slightly
more likely to drive to work than the city average. If employers pass on WPL scheme
costs to these groups they may find it harder to meet these additional costs
Mitigations: See general comments above
Carers Does your analysis indicate a disproportionate impact? Yes ☒ No ☐
Potential impacts: As above – those who hold caring responsibilities for children and older adults may
therefore be disproportionately affected if they need to incorporate other tasks into
their commute to work (trip chaining)
Mitigations: No mitigation identified unless the scheme included discretionary exemptions for
employees with caring responsibilities.
Other groups [Please add additional rows below to detail the impact for any other relevant groups as appropriate e.g.
asylum seekers and refugees; care experienced; homelessness; armed forces personnel and veterans]
Potential impacts:
Mitigations:

3.2 Does the proposal create any benefits for people based on their protected or other
relevant characteristics?
Outline any potential benefits of the proposal and how they can be maximised. Identify how the proposal will
support our Public Sector Equality Duty to:
✓ Eliminate unlawful discrimination for a protected group
✓ Advance equality of opportunity between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t
✓ Foster good relations between people who share a protected characteristic and those who don’t

How people move around the city is intrinsically linked to equality and inclusion. We know that many
protected characteristic groups are more likely to suffer the negative impacts of car use, such as
congestion, poor air quality, traffic accidents and unhealthy physical environments, whilst at the same
time having more limited access and use of vehicles. In addition, we know that these groups are much
more reliant on walking and public transport as a means of accessing work, education, training, and
services. (Transport and inequality: An evidence review for the Department for Transport, NatCen,
2019).

This proposal is in line with the Bristol Transport Strategy that seeks to rebalance the transport system
to ensure that car use is priced fairly compared with walking, cycling and public transport. Cars take up a
disproportionate amount of space on public highway which limits the use of that space for more
investment in sustainable modes of transport (e.g. bike and bus lanes and wider pavements). The
introduction of a WPL has benefits associated with a reduction in car use and a subsequent increase in
the use of alternative modes such as walking, cycling and public transport. By increasing the tariffs
Page 297
OFFICIAL
associated with car ownership we may be able to encourage people to re-evaluate the need to own a
vehicle. A reduction in the number of car trips will have a beneficial impact on air quality. In turn this will
have a positive impact on people’s health.

Step 4: Impact

4.1 How has the equality impact assessment informed or changed the proposal?
What are the main conclusions of this assessment? Use this section to provide an overview of your findings. This
summary can be included in decision pathway reports etc.
If you have identified any significant negative impacts which cannot be mitigated, provide a justification showing
how the proposal is proportionate, necessary, and appropriate despite this.
Summary of significant negative impacts and how they can be mitigated or justified:
Depending on how the scheme is designed the EQIA at this stage has highlighted that there are impacts on various
groups that need to be considered during the development of the business case. This includes potential
disproportionate impacts on Black, Asian and minoritised ethnic groups, older people (50+) and people in social
deprivation.
Summary of positive impacts / opportunities to promote the Public Sector Equality Duty:
Depending on how the scheme is designed there are likely to be a number of benefits for different protected
characteristic groups who often negative impacts of car use – such as congestion, poor air quality, traffic accidents
and unhealthy physical environments, whilst at the same time having more limited access and use of vehicles.

The WPL revenue will be ring-fenced for investment in public transport, walking, and cycling infrastructure, which
can improve accessibility for groups with lower car ownership (e.g., younger people, some older adults, Disabled
people without Blue Badges, and low-income households).

4.2 Action Plan
Use this section to set out any actions you have identified to improve data, mitigate issues, or maximise
opportunities etc. If an action is to meet the needs of a particular protected group please specify this.
Improvement / action required Responsible Officer Timescale
To review and update the EQIA through the development of the Laura Gosling Review quarterly
business case and/or key project
milestones

4.3 How will the impact of your proposal and actions be measured?
How will you know if you have been successful? Once the activity has been implemented this equality impact
assessment should be periodically reviewed to make sure your changes have been effective your approach is still
appropriate.
A monitoring and evaluation strategy will be developed for the WPL scheme as part of the proposed business
case.

Step 5: Review
The Equality and Inclusion Team need at least five working days to comment and feedback on your EqIA. EqIAs
should only be marked as reviewed when they provide sufficient information for decision-makers on the equalities

Page 298
OFFICIAL
impact of the proposal. Please seek feedback and review from the Equality and Inclusion Team before requesting
sign off from your Director1.
Equality and Inclusion Team Review: Director Sign-Off:
Reviewed by Equality and Inclusion Team

Date: 19/09/2025 Date: 2nd October 2025

1 Review by the Equality and Inclusion Team confirms there is sufficient analysis for decision makers to consider the
likely equality impacts at this stage. This is not an endorsement or approval of the proposal.

Page 299
OFFICIAL
Agenda Item 14

Non-key Decision Committee Report

PURPOSE: Non-key decision update report

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 23 October 2025

TITLE: 2025/26 P5 Finance Forecast Report – Transport and Connectivity Committee
Officer presenting the report: Alex Hearn Job title: Director Economy of Place

Committee Chair: Cllr Ed Plowden
Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Purpose of Report:

1. The Council Revenue and Capital budget for 2025/26 was agreed by Full Council on 25 February
2025. This report presents to the Transport and Connectivity Committee the financial forecast at
Period 5 (P5) against the budget as at the end of August 2025.
Evidence Base / Context

1. The Transport function is divided between Highways and Traffic within the Management of Place
division, City Transport within Economy of Place. City Transport includes both Strategic City
Transport and Local and Sustainable Transport.

2. See Appendix A for a full breakdown.

Officer Recommendations:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity notes the contents of the report on the P5 forecast.

Corporate Strategy alignment:

1. The Corporate Strategy underpins the council’s budget

City Benefits:

1. Cross priority report that covers whole of council’s business

Consultation Details:

1. N/A
Background Documents:
1
Version January 2024 Page 300
OFFICIAL
Budget Report 2024/25

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background information and detail YES

2
Version January 2024 Page 301
OFFICIAL
Appendix A6 – Transport & Connectivity
2025/26
Committee
– P5 Budget Monitor Report

Section A: Revenue Budget Monitor
Revised Forecast Outturn
Budget Outturn Variance
P05 £(12.8)m £(12.6)m £0.1m overspend

Variance against budget:

May Jun Jul Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb
£0.2m - - £0.1m
▼↓ ▲↑

Position by Service

Revised
Revised
Movemen Budget
Budget
t in vs
Period 5 Budget Monitoring Approved Revised vs
Forecast forecast Forecas
- Summary Budget Budget Forecast
variance t
Variance
from P2 Varianc
at P5
e
£m £m £m £m £m %
Transport and Connectivity
432 - Traffic & Highways
(12.780) (13.440) (13.440) (0.019) (0.000) 0.0%
maintenance
433 - Strategic City Transport 1.074 1.319 1.391 (0.087) 0.071 5.4%
434 - Local & Sustainable
(0.704) (0.633) (0.573) 0.075 0.060 -9.5%
Transport
Total Transport and
(12.409) (12.755) (12.623) (0.031) 0.131 -1.0%
Connectivity

Key Messages:

The Transport and Connectivity committee is reporting a £0.1 million pressure against a revised
budget of £(12.8) million. This pressure is the net of several small savings and pressures with the
primary pressures caused by reduced E-Scooter income from the Combined Authority (CA),
insufficient section 38 and 278 receipts against budgeted income and higher Metrobus iPoint costs
than allowed for within the budget.
Escooter revenue share was previously offered as a saving for 2024/25 however, due to a change in
the contract, this has not materialised. The proposed saving was £0.5 million, reduced to £0.35
million in 25/26, with only £0.15 million currently forecasted. Conversations are ongoing with the CA
to seek to mitigate this pressure.

Savings Delivery

Page 302
OFFICIAL
Transport and Connectivity

No. of Plan Forecast Variance
Spread of Risk
Items £'000 £'000 £'000

Blue
- - - -
Green
13 840 840 -
Amber 1 300 - (300)
Red 1 250 150 (100)

Total 15 1,390 990 (400)
Prior Month Comparator
15 1,390 1,290 (100)

Change from Prior Month - Increase/(Decrease) - - 300 300
Period 2
15 1,390 1,290 (100)

Change from P2 to P5 - Increase/(Decrease) - - (300) (300)

Blue Savings Realised (delivered)

Green Savings Forecast to be Realised (as plan or
through alternative action)

Amber Medium Risk to Savings Delivery-mitigating
action being considered/worked on

Red High Risk to Savings Delivery- Limited
Scope of Mitigation

List of forecast underdelivered savings

Variation Explanation / Sum of Savings Forecast
Saving Name
Commentary Variation to Plan
£'000
The concession is between the
West of England Combined
Authority and the Supplier. A
E-scooter concession (100)
contract variation has reduced
the revenues due to Bristol City
Council.
(100)

Page 303
OFFICIAL
Section B: Risks and Opportunities

P5
TOTAL NET RISK / 553
(OPPORTUNITY)
Division Risk or Description Risk / Likelihood Net Risk /
Opportunity (Opportunity) Opportunity
£'000 £'000
47 Risk T&H balancing figure - Medium Likelihood - 398
income deficit on MSCP 795 Risk is likely to come
& On-Street Parking, to bear, mitigations
partly offset by surpluses are in place, but may
in Penalty Charge Notice require further
income and other lines clarifications and
actions to deliver.
47 Risk Pressure on street High Likelihood - 155
lighting budget which 207 Risk is very likely to
audit have come to bear,
recommended is mitigations are being
transferred into Energy reviewed but not yet
service clear
(N.B. not yet
transferred).

• Traffic and Highways: £0.795 million risk (gross) is principally caused by income targets
increasing by inflation in 2024/25 and 2025/26 on fees and charges that are outside the
control of the service.
• Traffic and Highways: £0.207 million risk (gross) associated with energy price pressure on
street lighting budget.

Section C: Capital

Approved Revised Expenditure to Forecast Outturn
Budget Budget Date Outturn Variance

P05 £49.2m £70.6m £19.9m £63.3m £(7.3)m
28.2% of Budget 89.7% of
Budget

Gross Expenditure by Programme Current Year (FY2025) - Period 5 Performance to budget

Revised Revised
Revised
Budget Budget
Revised Expenditure budget vs
Ref Scheme Forecast vs vs
Budget to Date Expenditure
Forecast Forecast
to date
Variance Variance

£m £m £m £m % %
Transport & Connectivity
GR09 Clean Air Zone Programme 6.779 0.743 3.329 (3.450) 11.0% 49.1%
GR14 Public Transport 23.063 5.011 20.124 (2.939) 21.7% 87.3%

Page 304
OFFICIAL
GR15 Active Transport 3.551 2.632 6.955 3.404 74.1% 195.9%
GR17 Local Transport Schemes 2.262 0.226 1.062 (1.200) 10.0% 47.0%
GR18 Strategic Transport Projects 3.739 0.850 1.927 (1.812) 22.7% 51.5%
PL01 Metrobus 0.849 0.340 0.600 (0.249) 40.1% 70.6%
Highways & Traffic
PL10 32.412 9.155 25.596 (6.816) 28.2% 79.0%
Infrastructure - General
Highways & Traffic - Street
PL10B 0.491 0.319 0.591 0.100 64.9% 120.4%
Lighting (ITS)
Cattle Market Road site re-
PL11A (2.531) 0.617 3.149 5.680 -24.4% -124.4%
development
Total Transport & Connectivity 70.615 19.893 63.333 (7.282) 28.2% 89.7%

The table above shows the following variances:

• GR09 – Clean Air Zone Programme (-£3.450m). This variance is due to extension of funds to
be used for the Financial Assistance Scheme (£2.950m) into 2028 due to state 2 assessment
and current air quality levels alongside reprofiling of freight consolidation spend into future
years (£0.900m).
• GR14 – Public Transport (-£2.929m). This variance is due primarily to reprofiling of spend on
work packages 1 and 2 of the Stockwood to Henbury Corridor programme (£1.0m and £1.7m
respectively). These schemes are funded by the CA as part of the CRSTS programme.
• GR15 – Active Transport (£3.404m). This variance is due primarily to the East Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood (EBLN) and Old City King St (OCKS) projects. EBLN overspent its 2024/25
budget by approximately £0.6 million. This project is funded by the CA through CRSTS and a
change request is being negotiated to release existing allocated funding. The budget remains
as -£0.6 million, with additional spend due by year end. The CRSTS programme is currently
undergoing a re-baselining exercise which once completed, will potentially unlock funding for
the scheme.
• GR17 – Local Transport Schemes (-£1.200m). This variance is due primarily to reprofiling of
spend on the A432 Fishponds Road project into future years as construction is not due to start
until 2025/26. The scheme has been grant-funded up front by the Department for Transport.
• GR18 – Strategic Transport Projects (-£1.812m). This variance is due to a considerable
underspend noted on the Hengrove Park junction scheme, to be transferred to a housing
project in the area.
• PL10 – Highway & Traffic Infrastructure – General (-£6.816m). This variance is due to
reprofiling of spend into future financial years for New Cut Bridges & New Cut Walls.
• PL11A – Cattle Market Road site re development (variance +£5.680m). This variance is due to
the prior year overspend on the Harbour Walkway project, for which the budget has not yet
been finalised. Due to known issues, the scheme was overspent by £2.5 million, bringing
forward a negative budget of £2.5 million into 2025/26. Transport and Connectivity Committee
has approved a funding strategy for this scheme utilising CRSTS overprogramming, EDF and
other funding, but this has not yet been finalised with the CA, meaning the budget has yet to
be updated.

Page 305
OFFICIAL
