Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Directorate Scheme of Delegations:
Growth and Regeneration Directorate
Introduction

In the Constitution, Full Council delegate certain powers and functions to the
Executive Directors.

This is the Growth and Regeneration Directorate Scheme of Delegation to
officers. It:

i) Summarises the powers and functions delegated to the Executive
Director of Growth and Regeneration, in Part 1
ii) Describes how the Executive Director has delegated these powers
and functions to officers in their Directorate to exercise on their
behalf, in Part 2.

This scheme is subject to the Council’s Constitution, including the Council
Schemes of Delegation and the Procurement Rules, the Financial Regulations
and Standing Orders. This Scheme of Delegation will need to be read in
conjunction with the Finance Scheme of Delegation.

The Executive Director will delegate to the post that’s most appropriate for the
exercise of the function. Any direct line manager between the Executive Director
and the post delegated the function is also entitled to perform that function, unless
otherwise stated in the scheme.

In the event of a civil emergency or a business continuity disruption, all authorities
relevant to the management of the incident are delegated to named duty officers,
officers attending multi-agency coordination group meetings or officers chairing an
Incident Management Team, as appropriate.

Although Executive Directors can delegate functions they remain responsible for
and accountable to the council for the exercise of their delegated powers. On
occasions they may still decide to take decisions themselves. Officers may decide
to refer delegated powers back to the Executive Director, or Full Council. Full
Council can also decide to reserve a particular decision to themselves.

This Scheme of Delegation will remain in force until it is amended or revoked by
the Executive Director for Growth and Regeneration or via changes to the Council
Schemes of Delegation.

Guidance for managers and staff on how to use Schemes of Delegation is
available on the Source.

1
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Part 1: Functions delegated under the Constitution to the Executive Director
of Growth and Regeneration

Any function of a committee falling within the portfolio of the Growth and
Regeneration Directorate including functions relating to:
(a) Economy of Place;
(b) Management of Place;
(c) Property, Assets and Infrastructure
shall be executed by the Executive Director – Growth and Regeneration
notwithstanding its onward delegation in the officer schemes of delegation.

Licensing Functions
All those functions set out in the terms of reference of the Licensing Committee
which full council has arranged for that committee to discharge are the
responsibility of the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration except for the
power to institute proceedings (s. 346 Gambling Act 2005) which is the
responsibility of the Director Legal and Democratic Services.

Planning and Development Control Functions
All the functions set out in the terms of reference of the Development Control
Committees are delegated to the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration

Public Safety & Protection Functions
All functions set out in the Public Safety & Protection Committee terms of
reference are delegated to the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration.

C.5 Public Rights of Way & Greens Functions
(a) All the functions set out in List A of the Public Rights of Way & Greens
Committee are delegated to the Chief Executive.
(b) All the functions set out in List B of the Public Rights of Way & Greens
Committee are delegated to the Executive Director Growth and Regeneration.

Part 2: Delegations to Officers from the Executive Director

1. Economy of Place

A. Function: Economic Development including (but not exclusively):
i. European Funding Management, Delivery, and resource procurement
ii. Managed workspace provision and management
iii. Economic development strategy and policy
iv. Inward investment and business retention
v. Business Support
vi. Business Engagement
vii. Destination management and tourism
viii. Sector development
ix. High Streets and Local Centres development
x. City Centre development
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Economic Development
Manager

B. Function: the delivery of BTQEZ
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Economy of Place
and EZ Programme Director
2
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

C. Function: To make all day-to-day management decisions relating to the
Council’s functions as they relate to Markets
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Economy of Place

D. Function: City Transport
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Transport

E. Function: Transport Development Management
i. To make act on behalf of Highway and Transport Authority on transport
matters as a statutory consultee on planning applications
ii. To be responsible for making and administering highway agreements
related to planning matters
iii. To supervise highway works and issue Certificates in respect of the
Highways Act 1980.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Transport

F. Function: Gating Orders
i. To prepare and advertise a Draft Order proposing closure of highway for
28 days consultation.
ii. Decision to authorise the making of Gating Order to allow the closure of
highway (to be reviewed annually).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Transport

G. Function: Flood Risk Management
i. Discharging of the duties placed on Bristol City Council as the Lead
Local Flood Authority as defined in the Flood and Water Management
Act 2010.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Transport

H. Function: Flood Risk Management
i. Discharging of duties placed on Bristol City Council as defined in the
Land Drainage Act 1991.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Flood Risk and Data Manager

I. Function: Concessionary Bus Travel
i. To determine applications for passes which provide entitlement to
concessionary bus travel
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Information and Engagement
Group Manager

J. Function: Traffic Regulation and Management Orders
i. Authority to prepare, consult upon and advertise permanent orders and
statutory notices
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Traffic and Highways
Maintenance and Head of City Transport

K. Function: Traffic Regulation and Management Orders
i. Prepare consult and design any traffic regulation or management
scheme which is included in any Traffic Management Work Programme
or is intended to facilitate the carrying out of any new development
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Traffic and Highways
Maintenance and Head of City Transport

3
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

L. Function: Traffic Regulation and Management Orders
i. To authorise the variation of the effect of any Experimental Traffic
Regulation Order made pursuant to Ri below
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Transport

M. Function: Traffic Regulation and Management Orders
i. To advertise, consult, notify and otherwise carry out all statutory
procedures (including the making of any required Experimental Traffic
Regulation Order) in respect of any scheme for which the preparatory
work has been carried out.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Transport and
Director: Economy of Place

N. Function: Traffic Regulation and Management Orders
i. Where a Permanent Traffic Regulation Order is required in respect of
the scheme and the Director does not wish to discuss any objections
with the Executive Director or no objections are received to the proposal
to make the order, decision to make and seal the order; and
ii. Where an Experimental Traffic Regulation Order has been made and
the Director does not wish to discuss any objections with the Executive
Director or no objections have been received in response to it, decision
to:
iii. Make and seal a further Order modifying the provisions of the Order
pursuant to (c) above; and
iv. Make and seal a Permanent Order continuing indefinitely the provisions
of the Experimental Order.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Economy of Place

O. Function: Traffic Regulation and Management Orders
i. Decision to carry out all necessary notification and other statutory
procedures in respect of the installation of any pedestrian crossing.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Economy of Place

P. Function: Traffic Regulation Orders for Parking Restrictions
i. Authority to prepare detailed designs in respect of any traffic regulation
order that is required as a result of reviewing existing parking
restrictions within the Civil Enforcement Area and Special Enforcement
Area as required under the Road Traffic Act 1991.
ii. Where any traffic regulation order or parts of an order advertised is
unopposed, and it appears to the Service Director Transport expedient
to introduce all or some of those parts immediately and before the
introduction of the remainder of the proposal, decision to authorise the
sealing of an Order in respect of those parts.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Transport

Q. Function: Minor changes to the Controlled Parking Zone
i. Authority to implement minor changes to the extent and operation of the
Controlling Parking Zone.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Transport and
Head of Traffic and Highways Maintenance

R. Function: Minor changes to the Controlled Parking Zone

4
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

i. Where an order or notice pursuant to the Road Traffic Regulation Act
1984 or otherwise is necessary to implement a minor change, decision
to carry out statutory advertisement, consultation and notification and
all other measures required prior to making the order or notice and,
where a Traffic Regulation Order is required in respect of the minor
change and no substantial objections are received to the proposal, to
make and seal the order.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Economy of Place

S. Function: Stopping Up Orders
i. To make comments to the relevant Government Office in respect of
highway closures under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Transport

T. Function: Speed Limits
i. To initiate Speed Limit Orders together with the advertisement and
sealing of these orders if no substantial objections are received.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Transport

U. Function: Sustainable Transport, including:
i. Passenger Transport
ii. Infrastructure
iii. Engagement and Support Services
iv. Public Transport
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Transport

V. Function: Bus and Coach Stops & Stands, Taxi Ranks
i. To exercise powers for installation, maintenance, re-siting and removal
including poles and flags, shelters, raised platforms, road markings,
information displays, CCTV and litter bins.
ii. Determining service allocations.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Group Manager: Public
Transport

W. Function: Traffic Regulation Conditions
i. To make an application to the Traffic Commissioner for the imposition of
conditions on local bus services where required to regulate their routes
and/or stopping place / locations / times / duration.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Transport

X. Function: Development Management
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Chief Planner / Head of
Planning Services; Development Management Team Managers and Principal
Development Management Officers

Y. Function: Authority for the making of comments on planning applications
situated within the boundary of neighbouring local planning authorities
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Chief Planner / Head of Planning Services

Z. Function: Building Regulations and Standards, including:
i. Statutory building control service
ii. Enforcement of the building regulations
5
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

iii. Control of demolitions
iv. Appointee of 3rd Party Wall surveyor under the Party Wall Act 1996
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Chief Planner / Head of
Planning Services; Building Control Managers and Building Control Team
Managers

AA. Function: Control of Dangerous Structures - to exercise powers contained
Section 78(1) of the Building Act 1984 (Dangerous Buildings – emergency
measures).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Building Control Manager,
Building Control Team Managers, Principal Structural Engineer, Dangerous
Structure call out team. (Designated Proper Officers).

BB. Function: To authorise proceedings for contravention of Section 37 of the
Public Health Act 1890 (‘Safety of Platforms, &c. erected or used on public
occasions’)
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Building Control Manager,
Building Control Team Managers. (Designated Proper Officers).

CC. Function: Authentication of documents, etc. Building Act 1984 – Section
93
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Building Control Manager,
Building Control Team Managers, Principal Structural Engineer, Dangerous
Structure call out team. (Designated Proper Officers).

DD. Function: To issue requisitions for information pursuant to the provisions of
Section 16 of the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1976
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Building Control Manager and
Building Control Team Managers. (Designated Authorised Officers)

EE. Function: Sustainable City and Climate Change
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Sustainable City and Climate
Change Manager, Sustainable City Team Manager, Environmental
Performance Manager and Climate Change Team Manager

FF.Function: Strategic Planning, including:
i. Neighbourhood Planning
ii. Strategic Planning at sub regional and local level
iii. Maintenance of statutory local development plan, excluding matters
relating to the adoption of the Site Allocations and Development
Management Policies Local Plan and other Development Plan
Documents, which require approval by Full Council, in accordance with
the Council’s Constitution.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Chief Planner / Head of
Planning Services,

GG. Function: The making of a Direction under Article 4 of the Town and
Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 1995 as amended
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Economy of Place

HH. Function: Community Infrastructure Levy and Planning Obligations
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Economy of Place;
Planning Obligations Manager
6
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

II. Function: Designation of the boundary of a Neighbourhood Planning Area
(NPA)
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Chief Planner / Head of
Planning Services

JJ. Function: Designation of the 'Qualifying Body' to act as Neighbourhood
(Planning) Forum for a determined NPA
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Chief Planner / Head of
Planning Services

KK. Function: Residual planning functions such as preparation of
supplementary planning guidance, designation of conservation areas, areas of
archaeological interest and nature reserves and making compulsory purchase
orders.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Economy of
Place

LL. Function: Culture including (but not exclusively):
a. bidding for small scale funding Bids
b. Awarding of small scale arts grants
c. Support of the cultural sector
d. Operational running of our Cultural Venues
e. The SLA Service Delivery for Bristol Beacon / Bristol Music Trust
f. Approval of policies and plans for Bristol Museums service and
Bristol Archives
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Culture and Creative
Industries

MM. Function: To make all day-to-day management decisions relating to the
Council’s functions as they relate to Events and Conferences (at Bristol
Museum and Art Gallery, M-Shed and the Create Centre.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Transformation –
Culture and Creative Industries Service

2. Management of Place

A. Function: Traffic and Highways
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and Head
of City Transport

B. Function: Adoption of private streets after execution of street works.
i. To serve statutory notices in accordance with s.228 of the Highways Act
1980.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways

C. Function: Parking, Bus Lane, Moving Traffic and Clean Air Zone Enforcement
To carry out all necessary work with regard to de-criminalised parking, bus
lane, moving traffic and clean air zone enforcement within the Civil
Enforcement Area and Special Enforcement Area under the provisions of the
Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 the Traffic Management Act 2004, the
Transport Act 2000 and any other enactment to include the following:
i. To deal with all matters relating to the issuing and processing of Penalty
7
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Charge Notices, including determining representations made against
the Notices, cancellation of Penalty Charge Notices and all subsequent
actions regarding non-payment of notices.
ii. To deal with all matters relating to the processing of appeals against the
issue of Penalty Charge Notices that have been made to the Traffic
Penalty Tribunal, including where necessary, not to contest appeals and
cancellation of Penalty Charge notices.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways; Parking
Manager; PCN Appeals & Moving Traffic Enforcement Manager and Senior
PCN Appeals Team Officer (BG11 only).

D. Function: Parking Facilities
i. To determine requests for the use of off-street car parks and on-street
parking where restrictions are in place under a traffic regulation order,
and to grant or refuse permission to individuals or organisations for their
use.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways; Parking
Manager; Parking Services Infrastructure Team Manager

E. Function: Disabled Persons Parking Badges (Blue Badge Scheme)
i. To determine applications for and to issue Blue Badges, and to
withdraw the facilities offered under the Blue Badge Scheme if there is
evidence of on-going misuse, (even if the badge is not issued by the
authority).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways; Parking
Manager; Parking Services Business and Permit Manager

F. Function: Issuing of Parking Permits
i. To carry out all necessary work relating to the issue of parking permits
within designated controlled parking zones (permitted parking areas
and residents’ parking schemes) within the Civil Enforcement Area and
Special Enforcement area.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways; Parking
Manager; Parking Services Business and Permit Manager

G. Function: Off-Street Parking Orders
i. To include land within an appropriate parking order and designate land
as an off-street parking place.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways; Parking
Manager; Parking Services Infrastructure Team Manager

H. Function: Advisory Disabled Parking Bays
i. To administer and process (including approval or refusal of) all
applications for disabled persons parking bays and white line advisory
markings.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways; Head of
City Transport; Parking Manager; Parking Services Infrastructure Team
Manager; Group Manager Road Safety and Local Engineering

I. Function: Erection of Traffic Signs
i. To deal with all matters relating to the erection, alteration, maintenance
and removal of traffic signs, signals and road markings.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Network Operations Team

8
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Manager; Head of Highways ; Head of City Transport

J. Function: Temporary Traffic Orders / Notices
i. To carry out all preparatory work for the making of Temporary Traffic
Regulation Orders and Notices under the Road Traffic Regulation Act
1984 or otherwise and to determine and levy charges.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Management of
Place; Head of Highways and Networks Operation Team Manager

K. Function: Temporary Traffic Orders / Notices
i. Decision to authorise the making and sealing of Temporary Traffic
Regulation Orders and Notices under the Road Traffic Regulation Act
1984 or otherwise.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Management of
Place; Head of Highways and Networks Operation Team Manager

L. Function: Temporary Traffic Orders / Notices
i. To make and execute Temporary Traffic Notices under the Road Traffic
Regulation Act 1984.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways; Networks
Operation Team Manager; Network Management lead officers and Emergency
Highways Officers

M. Function: Street Fairs – Temporary Road Closure
i. To approve applications for temporary road closures under Section 21
of the Town Police Clauses Act 1847 if no substantial objections arise
from the consultative process.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

N. Function: Stopping Up and Diversion Orders
i. To confirm any public footpath, bridleway or road used as a public path
or byway stopping up or diversion orders where no substantial
objections have been received or where the objections made have been
withdrawn.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

O. Function: Creation / Diversion or Extinguishment
i. To exercise powers to effect the creation, diversion, extinguishment or
stopping-up of adopted highways and footpaths which are directly
associated with planning applications determined under delegated
authority.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Management of
Place

P. Function: Adoption of Highways
i. To be responsible for issuing Certificates under the Highways Act 1980
in respect of the adoption of highways.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Transport;
Transport Development Management Manager

Q. Function: Adoption of Highways

9
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

i. Duty to keep register of adopted highways.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Highway Maintenance and Assets Manager

R. Function: Street Naming and Numbering
i. To serve statutory notices, the naming of streets and numbering of
properties under any duty or power contained in the following Acts:
a. Public Health Act 1925
b. Towns Improvement Clauses Act 1847
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Highway Maintenance and Assets Manager

S. Function: Designation of Principal Roads
i. To review, revise and make applications for Principal Road status for
those routes which are considered appropriate.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Highway Maintenance and Assets Manager

T. Function: Goods Vehicles Operators’ Licences
i. To make representations about, negotiate improvements or submit
objections to any licence application where considered necessary.
Present evidence at any subsequent public inquiry.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Management of
Place

U. Function: Duty to serve notice of proposed action in relation to obstruction
(section 115E of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Manager

V. Function: Functions relating to the making good of damage and the removal
of obstructions (section 135B of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Manager

W. Function: Powers relating to the removal of things so deposited on highways
as to be a nuisance (section 149 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Manager

X. Function: Powers to remove structures from the highway (s.143 of the
Highways Act)
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways
(Designated Proper Officer).

Y. Function: Power to approve Pavement Licences under Part 1 and Section 3
of the Business and Planning Act 2020
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways, Team
Manager - Highway Maintenance and Assets, Network Operations Team
Manager

Z. Function: City Events and Festivals (and any other events as the need arises)

10
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

i. Site Permissions and contracts for events & festivals on City Council
land
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Regulatory Services & City
Events Manager and Head of Highways

AA. Function: Management and Maintenance of Parks and Green Spaces
including trees, allotments and small holdings, children’s play and associated
youth facilities, outdoor sports pitches, buildings and facilities.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Parks and Green
Spaces Parks Services Manager; Area Parks Managers; Parks Development
Manager; Parks Assets and Projects Manager; Landscape Works and Play
Manager; Trees and Woodlands Manager; Allotments and Smallholdings
Manager; and Allotments Officer

BB. Function: Management and Maintenance of Cemeteries and Crematoria
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Parks and Green
Spaces; Parks Commercial Manager; Business Unit Manager - Cemeteries
and Crematoria

CC. Function: Management and Maintenance of Blaise Nursery
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Parks and Green
Spaces; Parks Commercial Manager; Business Unit Manager - Nursery

DD. Function: Management of catering in Parks and Green Spaces
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Corporate Landlord,
Senior Operations Manager, Business Unit Manager - Catering

EE. Function: Management of concessions in Parks and Green Spaces
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Parks and Green
Spaces; Senior Operations Manager; Commercial Development Manager

FF.Function: Tree management in parks, green spaces and other council land
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Parks and Green
Spaces; Parks Estates Manager; Area Parks Managers; Trees and
Woodlands Manager; and Tree Officer

GG. Function: Harbour
i. City Docks and Port Authority functions
Functions include those where legislation confers duties or powers
upon the Council in its capacity to act as Port Authority for the Bristol
City Docks, including the following acts and all other legislation of a like
kind:
• Bristol Docks Acts and Orders 1848 to 1998,
• Harbours Docks and Piers Clauses Act 1847,
• The Bristol City Docks Harbour Revision Order 1998
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director Bristol Harbour
Authority/Harbour Master and Harbour Estate Manager

HH. Function: Harbour
i. Management and Maintenance of Harbours Estate, building, facilities,
open space, events, and commercial property.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director Bristol Harbour
Authority/Harbour Master and Harbour Estate Manager
11
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

II. Function: Harbour
i. To issue licences for “works” within the provisions of the City Docks
Harbour Revision Order 1988.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director Bristol Harbour
Authority/Harbour Master.

JJ. Function: Harbour
i. To licence Pilots and Hobblers
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director Bristol Harbour
Authority/Harbour Master.

KK. Function: Harbour
i. To be the Duty Holder under the provisions of the Port Marine Safety
Code.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director Bristol Harbour
Authority/Harbour Master.

LL. Function: Harbour
i. Power for the enforcement of Local Harbour Byelaws.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director Bristol Harbour
Authority/Harbour Master.

MM. Function: Harbour
i. Power to licence pleasure boats, live aboard boats and pleasure
vessels Section 94 of the Public Health Acts Amendment Act 1907
(c.53).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director Management of
Place, Director Bristol Harbour Authority/Harbour Master.

LL. Function: To make all day-to-day management decisions relating to the
Council’s functions as they relate to Docks Estates
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Management of
Place

MM. Function: Civil Contingencies (Emergency Preparedness & Resilience
Team)
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Service, City
Management & Response and Emergency Preparedness, Risk, Resilience
& Continuity Manager

NN. Function: Bristol Operations Centre (BOC)
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Service, City
Management & Response and BOC Manager

OO. Function: Libraries including (but not exclusively):
i. Management and maintenance of Libraries
ii. Maintenance and purchasing of materials for reference and loan
iii. Statutory responsibility for providing a library service
iv. Partner of Libraries West 7 authority consortium
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Libraries, Libraries
Management Team

12
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

3. Property, Assets and Infrastructure
A. Function: Major Projects including (but not exclusively):
i. Avonmouth and Severnside Enterprise Area (ASEA)
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Property, Assets and
Infrastructure

Energy
The Head of City Leap Client and Energy Service is delegated by the Director:
Property, Assets and Infrastructure to manage the proper use of the
operational, budgetary, staffing and other resources of the City Leap Client and
Energy Service as outlined below.

B. Function: City Leap Client Team including
(i) City Leap strategic partnership relationship management, assurance and
delivery
(ii) Energy supply
To make all day to day management decisions as they relate to the operation
of the council’s City Leap Client and Energy Service Team.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of City Leap Client and
Energy Service

C. Function: Energy
i. Functions relating to signing and management of works, funding, loans,
carbon purchases or services contracts for work carried out for the City
Leap Client and Energy Service, including any goods, works or services
to be provided by City Leap.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Works funding, loans,
purchases or services of between £100,000 and £250,000 - Director:
Property, Assets and Infrastructure
Works, funding, loans, purchases or services up to £100,000 – Head of
City Leap Client and Energy Service provided either i a detailed investment
appraisal (where appropriate) have been carried out and agreed with
colleagues from Resources Directorate or (ii) the City Leap Project
Acceptance Process has been completed.

D. Function: Energy
i. Functions relating to the installation of energy infrastructure, energy
efficiency or renewable energy measures, including such schemes
delivered under the City Leap Partnership, including all elements of
approval of projects under the Project Acceptance Process.
Post holder authorised to carry out function:
Programmes of work or individual projects of more than £100,000 -
£250,000 - Director: Property, Assets and Infrastructure, provided that in
relation to projects delivered by the City Leap strategic partner they are
satisfied that the Project Approval Process has been completed.

Programmes of work or individual projects of more than £25,000 -
£100,000 – Head of City Leap Client and Energy Service, provided that in
relation to projects delivered by the City Leap strategic partner they are
satisfied that the Project Approval Process has been completed.

13
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Programmes of work and individual work packages up to £25,000 – City
Leap Programme Assurance Managers

F. Function: Functions related to the operation and maintenance (O&M) of
council owned energy infrastructure assets, and delivery of the council’s
energy, heat and water supplies.

Post holder authorised to carry out function:
Works funding, loans, purchases or services relating to operation and
maintenance contracts for low carbon energy infrastructure assets or
energy, heat and water supplies of more than £100,000 - £250,000 -
Director: Property, Assets and Infrastructure, provided that in relation to
projects delivered by the City Leap strategic partner they are satisfied that
the Project Approval Process has been completed.

Works funding, loans, purchases or services relating to operation and
maintenance contracts for low carbon energy infrastructure assets or
energy, heat and water supplies of more than £25,000 - £100,000 – Head
of City Leap Client and Energy Service , provided that in relation to projects
delivered by the City Leap strategic partner they are satisfied that the
Project Approval Process has been completed.

Works funding, loans, purchases or services relating to operation and
maintenance contracts for low carbon energy infrastructure assets or energy,
heat and water supplies of up to £25,000 – Energy Supply Manger.

E. Function: Neighbourhood Enforcement and Street Scene
i. Clean Streets, Enforcement Concession, Community Toilet Scheme,
collecting charges for chargeable domestic waste, bulky waste.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Neighbourhood Enforcement
and Street Scene Manager; Street Scene Team Leader; Project Development
Officer and Project Support Officer

F. Function: Neighbourhood Enforcement and Street Scene
i. Neighbourhood Enforcement including waste disposal, statutory
nuisance, pollution (including but not limited to noise, air, land and water
pollution), buildings not secured against unauthorised entry,
accumulations which are detrimental to the amenity of an area,
highways obstructions & unauthorised works or damage to highways.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: See Regulatory enforcements
delegations below.

G. Function: Facilities Management
i. Functions relating to Facilities Management
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Corporate Landlord

H. Function: Facilities Management
i. To authorise changes under maintenance contracts
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Corporate Landlord

I. Function: Facilities Management
i. To make all day-to-day management decisions relating to the
Council’s functions as they relate to Cash in Transit

14
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Corporate Landlord

J. Function: Facilities Management
i. To make all day-to-day management decisions relating to the
Council’s functions as they relate to Fleet Services
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Corporate Landlord

K. Function: Facilities Management
i. To make all day-to-day management decisions relating to the
Council’s functions as they relate to Events and Conferences
(including the Create Centre)
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Corporate Landlord

I. Function: Management of catering in Parks and Green Spaces
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Corporate Landlord,
Senior Operations Manager, Business Unit Manager- Catering

Property Scheme of Delegations

The Director: Property, Assets, and Infrastructure, will undertake the role of
‘corporate landlord’.

In this scheme the term ‘land’ means real estate of whatever nature including
land, buildings, or structures, plus any rights over, under or through the land.

Property Transactions
In the course of its day-to-day business, the Council enters into a variety of land
agreements and performs a number of transactions, including those listed below:

1. Freehold acquisitions, disposals, including agreements for the exchange of
assets; (will be authorised by Service Manager and / or above)
2. Leasehold acquisitions and disposals, including disposals by way of a short
tenancy as defined by S123 of the Local Government Act 1972; (will be
authorised by Service Manager and /or above)
3. Agreeing terms for the completion of all rent reviews, renewals of leases,
the granting and renewals of licences including referrals to court or, for
independent determination;
4. Undertaking transactions including agreeing compensation, issuing notices,
entering into deeds of variation or rectification and the giving and
withholding of consents under the Landlord and Tenant Act 1954 and other
relevant Legislation e.g., Section 146 of the Law of Property Act 1925;
5. Agreeing terms for the sale of freehold reversions under the Leasehold
Reform Act 1967 and sale of rent charges;

6. Taking action to safeguard Council land and buildings including taking entry
into tenant's premises for the purpose of executing emergency works;
7. Entering into planning agreements as landowner;
8. Release of covenants;

15
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

9. Taking and granting easements, way leaves and rights of way;
10. Options Agreements; (will be authorised by Service Manager and / or
above)
11. Lease surrenders and exit agreements (including dilapidations);

12. Changes under maintenance contracts i.e., only where there is an existing
condition of contract (and in accordance with Corporate Procurement
Rules);
13. Appointing agents and procuring consultants and contractors in accordance
with Corporate Procurement Rules and Finance Regulations

14. To write-off rent arrears in respect of any single lease / tenancy. Not
exceeding the greater of 2-years rent or, £10,000 (will be authorised by
Service Manager and / or above);

15. Issuing instructions to the Legal Team to take possession proceedings
against lessees, tenants or licensees for breach of covenant including
taking actual possession;

16. Authorising applications in landowner capacity for consent or change of use
under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990;

17. Authorising the transfer of land between consenting executives and the
associated appropriation of statutory purpose;

18. Advertising proposals to appropriate and / or dispose of public open space
land, subject to any objections being subsequently reported to the
appropriate Committee.

19. Authorising the transfer of purpose for holding land (and the associated
appropriation) to defend against possible T&VG’s and to prevent objections
to developments being anything other than a compensatable matter (rather
than being able to prevent developments taking place) and

20. Compulsory acquisitions and land compensation claims (will be authorised
by Service Manager and / or above).
Conditions

1. All Key decisions will be taken by the relevant Policy Committee. The Council’s
constitution defines a Key decision as one that is likely to:

a) result in expenditure or savings of £500,000 or more (this excludes the sale
of land) or,
b) be significant in terms of its effect on communities living or working in an
area comprising two or more wards.

2. The reporting of transactions will be in accordance with the requirements of
‘Key’ and ‘Officer Decision Notices”. This could be quarterly if volume is
significant.

16
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

3. Officers will brief the relevant Committee Chair on the following before making
delegated decisions:

a) decisions that are not Key decisions but are otherwise significant (e.g.,
because they are controversial, or of particular interest to the public and /
or councillors);
b) the medium-term corporate property disposal plan (updated quarterly).

4. Whenever any of the Property transactions above (Nos. 1-19) have a direct
positive or neutral financial consequence for the Council and are in compliance
with S123 of the Local Government Act 1972 (and any subsequent variations)
namely a disposal of land for the ‘best consideration that can reasonably be
obtained’, authorisation will be at the discretion of the Service Manager or
Head of Corporate Landlord, at BG14 (and above) with the minimum
qualification of MRICS, unless otherwise stated.

5. Whenever any of the Property transactions above (Nos. 1-19) have a direct
negative financial consequence for the Council, whereby less than ‘best
consideration is to be obtained’ (thereby creating an undervalue, subsidy,
compensation or rent reduction) approval will be required to authorise such
property transactions prior to completion, as below.

6. In the case of Property transaction No. 20. All acquisitions of property through
compulsory acquisition will require authority from the relevant Policy
Committee. Following approval by the Policy Committee, the level and
payment of compensation and other costs within the approved budget for
compulsory acquisition will require Service Manager or Head of Corporate
Landlord approval.

Amount (capitalised) Approval required

Up to £25,000 Property Service Manager with the
minimum qualification of MRICS

In excess of £25,000 but less than Head of Corporate Landlord with the
£100,000 minimum qualification of MRICS

£100,000 but less than £250,000 Director: Property, Assets and
Infrastructure in consultation with
Service Manager or Head of Corporate
Landlord with the minimum
qualification of MRICS

£250,000 but less than £500k Director: Property, Assets and
Infrastructure in consultation with
Service Manager or Head of Corporate
Landlord with the minimum
qualification of MRICS and with
approval of the Section 151 Officer
and relevant Committee Chair

17
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Amount (capitalised) Approval required

£500,000 and above, but not more Policy Committee. Post approval of
than £1m the Key decision - the requisition or
payments can only be authorised by:
Executive Director (following
consultation with the Budget Holder)

Over £1m Policy Committee. Post approval of
the Key decision - the requisition or
payments can only be authorised by:
Section 151 Officer, in consultation
with the Director: Property, Assets and
Infrastructure
Over £2m Policy Committee. Post approval of
the Key decision - the requisition or
payments can only be authorised by:
Section 151 Officer, in consultation
with the Director: Property, Assets and
Infrastructure. Once Council authority
is obtained the Secretary of State’s
approval to be obtained before
implementation.

In the event for example, that sales at undervalue give rise to a state aid or other
issue, all issues will be resolved or resolution actions agreed before delegation is
sought. All risks to proceeding to transact will be stated in the valuation and
delegated authority request so the prospective signatory will be advised of the
risks and be able to consider before signing or, not.

Notes

1. Best consideration will be as defined by S123 of the Local Government Act
1972 (and any subsequent variations).

2. All transactions will be accompanied by a signed and countersigned
valuation in accordance with RICS best practice.

3. In all cases of a request for authority to act under delegated powers, the
form will be signed by separate parties therefore; the requester shall not be
the decision-maker.

All expenditure will be in accordance with the Financial Regulations.

4. Where property is acquired for the purpose of investment, the role of the
Committee Chair with responsibility for Property shall be discharged in
consultation with the Committee Chair with responsibility for Finance and
written delegated authority will be obtained from the Councils Chief
Finance Officer.
5. Any moveable assets located within properties proposed for sale, that
would be included as part of the sale (e.g. paintings) will be subject to

18
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

separate consideration and in accordance with paragraph seven of the
Finance Scheme of Delegations
6. Under Section 123 of the Local Government Act 1972, local authorities (LA)
have powers to dispose of land and buildings (including the sale of
freeholds, granting and assigning of leases and the granting of easements)
for the best consideration reasonably obtainable. A Discount (Undervalue)
of up to £2m may be agreed, under the General Disposal Consent
(England) 2003, subject to the LA being satisfied that the disposal will
secure the promotion or improvement of the economic, social or
environmental well-being.

7. If the undervalue exceeds £2m Government approval will be required.

8. Additionally, certain types of disposal may require Statutory consent e.g.,
Education sites, playing fields and allotments.

9. Once land and buildings have been declared surplus to requirements, the
Head of Corporate Landlord or Director with responsibility for Property will
arrange for the disposal of these assets in accordance with the Council’s
property strategy.

10. The proceeds from the sale of all land and buildings (subject to certain
statutory limitations) will not be earmarked for use by a specific service but
will be pooled and applied to finance future capital investment or, for any
other purpose permitted by Regulation (which may if approved, include
investment / re-investing into investment property).

Delegated Officers

The Executive Director, Growth and Regeneration has authorised the delegated
officers identified in schedule 2 to exercise the functions set out in the Terms of
Reference of the Public Rights of Way and Greens and Development Control
Committees including, but not restricted to:

• imposing any condition, limitation or restriction on an approval, consent,
licence, permission, or registration.
• determining whether and in what manner to enforce a failure to comply with an
approval, consent, licence, permission or registration.
• amending, modifying, varying, or revoking an approval, consent, licence,
permission or registration.

1. Economy of Place

A. Function: Planning
i. Power to determine application for planning permission.
Sections 70(1)(a) and (b) and 72 of the Town and Country Planning Act
1990 (c.8)
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers,
Principal DM officers and Team Coordinator

B. Function: Planning
i. Power to determine applications to develop land without compliance
19
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

with conditions previously attached.
Section 73(A) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM officers

C. Function: Planning
i. Power to grant planning permission for development already carried
out.
Section 73(A) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers,
Principal DM officers and Team Coordinator

D. Function: Planning
i. Power to decline to determine application for planning permission
Section 70A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM officers

E. Function: Planning
i. Duties relating to the making of determinations of planning applications.
Sections 69, 76 and 92 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 and
Articles 8, 10 to 13, 15 to 22 and 25 and 26 of the Town and Country
Planning (General Development Procedure Order 1995 (S.I. 1995/419
and directions made there under).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers,
Principal DM officers and Team Coordinator

F. Function: Planning
i. Power to determine application for planning permission made by a local
authority, alone or jointly with another person.
Section 316 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 and the Town
and Country Planning General Regulations 1992 (S.I. 1992/1492).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM officers

G. Function: Planning
i. Power to make determinations, give approvals and agree certain other
matters relating to the exercise of permitted development rights.
Parts 6, 7, 11, 17, 19, 20, 21 to 24, 26, 30 and 31 of Schedule 2 to the
Town and country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order
1995
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers,
Principal DM officers and Team Coordinator. Team Leader, Admin &
Business Support

H. Function: Planning
i. Power to enter into agreement regulating development or use of land.
Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM officers

I. Function: Planning
i. Power to issue a certificate of existing or proposed lawful use or

20
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

development.
Section 191(4) and 192(2) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers,
Principal DM officers and Team Coordinator

J. Function: Planning
i. Power to serve a completion notice
Section 94(2) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM officers

K. Function: Planning
i. Power to grant consent for the display of advertisements
Section 220 the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 and the Town and
Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) Regulations 1992
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers,
Principal DM officers and Team Coordinator

L. Function: Planning
i. Power to authorise entry onto land.
Section 196A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM officers

M. Function: Planning
i. Power to require the discontinuance of a use of land.
Section 102 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM officers

N. Function: Planning
i. Power to serve a planning contravention notice, breach of condition
notice or stop notice
Sections 171C, 187A and 183(1) of the Town and Country Planning Act
1990.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM officers

O. Function: Planning
i. Power to issue a temporary stop notice
Section 171 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM officers

P. Function: Planning
i. Power to issue an enforcement notice
Section 172 of the Town and Country Planning 1990
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM officers

Q. Function: Planning
i. Power to apply for an injunction restraining a breach of planning control
Section 187B of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.

21
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM officers

R. Function: Planning
i. Power to determine applications for hazardous substances consent,
and related powers
Sections 9(1) and 10 of the Planning (Hazardous Substances) Act 1990
(c.10).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM officers

S. Function: Planning
i. Duty to determine conditions of which old mining permissions, relevant
planning permissions relating to dormant sites or active Phase I or II
sites, or mineral permissions relating to mining sites, as the case may
be, are to be subject
Paragraph 2(6)(a) of Schedule 2 of the Planning and Compensation Act
1991, paragraph 9(6) of Schedule 13 of the Environment Act 1995
(c.25) and paragraph 6(5) of Schedule 14 to that Act.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Chief Planner / Head of
Planning Services; and DM Team Managers

T. Function: Planning
i. Power to require proper maintenance of land.
Section 215(1) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM officers

U. Function: Planning
i. Power to determine application for listed building consent, and related
powers.
Sections 16(1) and (217, 27(2) and 33(1) of the Planning (Listed
Buildings and Buildings in Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (c.9)
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers,
Principal DM Officers, Urban Design Team Manager and Principal Historic
Environment Officer

V. Function: Planning
i. Power to issue Certificate of Lawful works to listed buildings
The Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990:
sections 26H and 26I, as inserted by section 61 of the Enterprise and
Regulatory Reform Act 2013. The Planning (Listed Buildings)
(Certificates of Lawfulness of Proposed Works) Regulations 2014
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers,
Principal DM Officers, Urban Design Team Manager and Principal Historic
Environment Officer

W. Function: Planning
i. Duties relating to applications for listed building consent and certificates
of lawful works
Sections 13(1) and 14(1) and (4) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and
Buildings in Conservation Areas) Act 1990 and regulations 3 to 6 and 13
of the Town and Country Planning (Listed Buildings in Conservation

22
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Areas) Regulations 1990 and paragraphs 8, 15 and 22 of Dept. of the
Environment Circular 14/97
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers,
Principal DM Officers, Urban Design Team Manager and Principal Historic
Environment Officer

X. Function: Planning
i. Power to serve a building preservation notice, and related powers
Sections 3(1) and 4(1) of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Buildings in
Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Development
Management and Urban Design Team Manager

Y. Function: Planning
i. Power to issue enforcement notice in relation to demolition of unlisted
building in conservation area
Section 38 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Buildings in
Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM Officers

Z. Function: Planning
i. Powers to acquire a listed building in need of repair and to serve a
repairs notice
Section 47 and 48 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Buildings in
Conservation Areas) Act 1990.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Economy of Place

AA. Function: Planning
i. Power to apply for an injunction in relation to a listed building
Section 44A of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Buildings in
Conservation Areas) Act 1990
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM Officers

BB. Function: Planning
i. Power to execute urgent works to unoccupied listed buildings
Section 54 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Buildings in
Conservation Areas) Act 1990
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Chief Planner / Head of
Planning Services;

CC. Function: Planning
i. Power to authorise stopping up or diversion of footpath, bridleway or
restricted byway
Section 257 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM Officers

DD. Function: Planning
i. Powers relating to the protection of important hedgerows
Hedgerows Regulations 1997 (S.I. 1997/1160)

23
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM Officers

EE. Function: Planning
i. Powers relating to the preservation of trees.
Sections 197 to 214D of Town & Country Planning Act 1990
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Chief Planner / Head of
Planning Services; t, DM Team Managers,

FF.Function: Planning
i. Powers relating to complaints about high hedges.
Part 8 of the Anti-social behaviour Act 2003
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM Officers

GG. Function: Planning
i. Power to include modifications in other orders.
Section 53A of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers,
Principal DM Officers and Network Operations Team Manager

HH. Function: Planning
i. Power to revoke or modify planning permission
Section 97 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990

Post holder authorised to carry out function: Director: Economy of Place

II. Function: Planning
i. The making of Local Development Orders under Article 38 of the Town
and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure)
(England) Order 2015
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Chief Planner / Head of
Planning Services

JJ. Function: Planning
i. Power to exercise functions relating to Nationally Significant
Infrastructure Projects and Development Consent Orders as contained
in the Planning Act 2008.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: DM Team Managers and
Principal DM Officers

KK. Function: Economy of Place
ii. Powers relating to the preservation of trees.
The Town and Country Planning (Tree Preservation) (England)
Regulations 2012
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Chief Planner / Head of
Planning Services;

2. Transport

A. Function: Power to grant a street works license (section 50 of the New Roads
and Street Works Act 1991 (c.22)).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Network Operations Team
24
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Manager

B. Function: Power to permit deposit of builder’s skip on highway (section 139 of
the Highways Act 1980 (c.66) (“the Act”)).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Network Operations Team
Manager

C. Function: Duty to publish notice in respect of proposal to grant permission
under section 115E of the Act (section 115E of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Network Operations Team
Manager

D. Function: Power to license planning, retention and maintenance of trees etc.
in part of highway (Section 142 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways

E. Function: Power to authorise erection of stiles etc. on footpaths or bridleways
(section 147 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

F. Function: Power to license works in relation to buildings etc. which obstruct
the highway (Section 169 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways, Structures
Team Manager

G. Function: Power to consent to temporary deposits or excavations in streets
(section 171 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Network Operations Team
Manager and Head of Highways

H. Function: Power to dispense with obligation to erect hoarding or fence
(section 172 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

I. Function: Power to restrict the placing of rails, beams etc over highways
(section 178 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Structures Team Manager

J. Function: Power to consent to construction of cellars etc. under street
(section 179 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Structures Team Manager

K. Function: Power to consent to the making of openings into cellars etc. under
streets and pavement lights and ventilators (section 180 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Structures Team Manager

L. Function: Power to create footpath, bridleway or restricted byway by
agreement (section 25 of the Act (C.66)).

25
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

M. Function: Power to stop up footpaths, bridleways and restricted byways
(section 118 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

N. Function: Power to determine application for public path extinguishment order
(sections 118ZA and 118C(2) of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

O. Function: Power to make a rail crossing extinguishment order (section 118A
of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

P. Function: Power to make special extinguishment order (section 118B of the
Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

Q. Function: Power to divert footpaths, bridleways and restricted byways
(section 119 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

R. Function: Power to make a public path diversion order (sections 119ZA and
119C(4) of the Act)
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

S. Function: Power to make a rail crossing diversion order (section 119A of the
Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

T. Function: Power to make a special diversion order (section 119B of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

U. Function: Power to require applicant for order to enter into agreement
(section 119C(3) of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

V. Function: Power to make an SSSI diversion order (section 119D of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

W. Function: Duty to keep register with respect to applications under sections
118ZA, 118C, 119ZA and 119C of the Act (section 121B of the Act).

26
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

X. Function: Power to decline to determine certain applications (section 121C of
the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

Y. Function: Duty to assert and protect the rights of the pubic to use and
enjoyment of highways (section 130 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

Z. Function: Duty to serve notice of proposed action in relation to obstruction
(section 115E of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager, Structures Team Manager

AA. Function: Power to apply for variation of order under section 130B of the
Act (section 130B(7) of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Network Operations Team
Manager

BB. Function: Power to authorise temporary disturbance of surface of footpath,
bridleway or restricted byway (section 135 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and
Network Operations Team Manager

CC. Function: Power to temporarily divert footpath, bridleway or restricted
byway (section 135A of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and Network
Operations Team Manager

DD. Function: Functions relating to the making good of damage and the
removal of obstructions (section 135B of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and Network
Operations Team Manager

EE. Function: Powers relating to the removal of things so deposited on
highways as to be a nuisance (section 149 of the Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and Network
Operations Team Manager

FF.Function: Power to extinguish certain public rights of way (section 32 of the
Acquisition of Land Act 1981 (c.67)).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and Network
Operations Team Manager

GG. Function: Power to designate footpath as cycle track (section 3 of the
Cycle Tracks Act 1984 (c.38)).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and Network
Operations Team Manager

27
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

HH. Function: Power to make limestone pavement order (section 34(2) of the
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (c.69)).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and Network
Operations Team Manager

II. Function: Power to make Modification Orders under section 53(2)(b) of the
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 following a legal event that has already
occurred under section 53 (3)(a) of the same Act).
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and Network
Operations Team Manager

JJ. Function: Power to discharge and acquire from other authorities, functions
relating to Definitive Map Modification Orders and Public Path Orders (section
101 of the Local Government Act 1972.
Post holder authorised to carry out function: Head of Highways and Network
Operations Team Manager

3. Regulatory functions
This section contains all the regulatory functions within the Growth and
Regeneration Directorate. It must be read in conjunction with the Limitations set
out in Appendix 1.

For the avoidance of doubt, where legislation is not specified or identified,
authorisation extends to all other legislation of a like kind under which the Council
is authorised to exercise any of its functions.

A. Function: Consumer Protection Legislation
i. Authorised Functions contained in this paragraph are those arising
under Consumer Protection legislation and includes powers arising
under the Explosives Acts which can be enforced by local authority
officers, together with the Council’s powers relating to age restricted
sales and all legislation which confers duties and powers upon the
Council in its capacity as Weights and Measures Authority as defined
under Section 69 of the Weights and Measures Act 1985, including the
Consumer Rights Act 2015 and Digital Markets, Competition and
Consumers Act 2024.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1: Regulatory Services & City Events Manager; Trading Standards
Manager; Senior Trading Standards Officer; Trading Standards Officer; Animal
Health Officer; Trainee/Apprentice Trading Standards Officer; Fair Trading
Officer; Trading Standards Investigator/Financial Investigator; South West
Regional Investigation Team Manager; Investigator; Investigator- Lettings Lead
Enforcement Authority; Specialist Regulatory Solicitor.

B. Function: Animal Welfare Legislation and Relevant Licensing
i. Authorised Functions contained in this paragraph are those arising
under legislation governing animal licensing and animal welfare,
including the Animal Welfare Act 2006, the Veterinary Medicines
Regulations 2006, the Animal Health Act 1981, the Animal Health and
Welfare Act 1984, the Animal Boarding Establishments Act 1963, the
Breeding of Dogs Act 1973 and 1991, the Breeding and Sale of Dogs
(Welfare) Act 1999, the Performing Animals (Regulation) Act 1925, the
28
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Slaughterhouses Act 1974, the Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976, the
Pet Animals Act 1951, the Riding Establishments Act 1964 and 1970;
The Dogs Act 1906; The Dangerous Dogs Act 1991; The Zoo Licensing
Act 1981; and all other legislation of a like kind.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1: Regulatory Services & City Events Manager; Trading Standards
Manager; Senior Trading Standards Officer; Trading Standards Officer; Animal
Health Officer; Trainee/Apprentice Trading Standards Officer; Fair Trading
Officer; Trading Standards Investigator/Financial Investigator; Team Leader,
Neighbourhood Enforcement Team; Senior Neighbourhood Enforcement
Officer; Neighbourhood Enforcement Officer

C. Function: Animal Welfare Legislation and Relevant Licensing
i. Appointment in exercise of the power conferred upon the council by
S51 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 to act as an inspector for the
purposes of the of the said Act.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1: Regulatory Services & City Events Manager; Trading Standards
Manager; Senior Trading Standards Officer; Trading Standards Officer; Animal
Health Officer; Trainee/Apprentice Trading Standards Officer; Fair Trading
Officer; Trading Standards Investigator/Financial Investigator; Team Leader,
Neighbourhood Enforcement Team; Senior Neighbourhood Enforcement
Officer; Neighbourhood Enforcement Officer;

D. Function: Food Safety Legislation and Relevant Licensing Provisions
i. Authorised functions contained in this paragraph include those arising
under The Food Safety Act 1990, The General Food Regulations 2004,
The Food Safety and Hygiene (England) Regulations 2013, The Official
Feed and Food Controls (England) Regulations 2009, The Trade in
Animals and Related Product Regulations 2011 and other legislation
governing food and food hygiene, including all legislation which confers
duties or powers upon the Council in its capacity as Food Authority as
described under Section 5 of the Food Safety Act 1990 and in its
capacity as enforcement authority for such legislation.
ii. This officer is appointed pursuant to Regulation 12 of Transmissible
Spongiform Encephalopathies (No2) Regulations 2006 to act as an
inspector for the purposes of these regulations.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1: Regulatory Services & City Events Manager; Trading Standards
Manager; Senior Trading Standards Officer; Trading Standards Officer; Animal
Health Officer; Trainee/Apprentice Trading Standards Officer; Fair Trading
Officer; Trading Standards Investigator/Financial Investigator; North Somerset
Officers for duration of Bristol International Balloon Fiesta as determined in
S113 agreement between Bristol City Council & North Somerset Council.

E. Function: Agriculture Standards and Relevant Registration Provisions
i. Authorised functions contained in this paragraph are those arising
under the Agriculture Act 1970 and legislation governing the
importation, manufacture, storage and marketing of animal feed
materials, animal feeding stuffs and related materials and fertilizers, and
include all legislation which confers duties or powers upon the Council
in its capacity as enforcement authority in accordance with Section 67
of the Agriculture Act 1970 or competent body in accordance with

29
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Regulation 3 of The Official Feed and Food Controls (England)
Regulations 2007 and Regulation 4 of The Feed (Hygiene and
Enforcement) (England) Regulations 2005. This officer is appointed as
an inspector pursuant to section 67(3)(a) of the Act.
ii. This officer is appointed pursuant to Regulation 12 of Transmissible
Spongiform Encephalopathies (No2) Regulations 2006 to act as an
inspector for the purposes of these regulations.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1: Regulatory Services & City Events Manager; Trading Standards
Manager; Senior Trading Standards Officer; Trading Standards Officer; Animal
Health Officer; Trainee/Apprentice Trading Standards Officer; Fair Trading
Officer; Trading Standards Investigator/Financial Investigator; Senior
Investigator; Investigator; Trading Standards Manager North Somerset Council
subject to S113 LGA agreement.

F. Function: Health and Safety at Work
i. Appointed in exercise of the power conferred upon the council by
Section 19(1) of the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 to act as
an inspector for the purposes of the Act.
ii. Parag. 8a To sign, on behalf of the authority, authorisations of persons
to accompany appointed inspectors in the exercise of their functions
under the Act.
iii. Parag. 8b To approve, on behalf of the authority, transfer and
assignments of premises between Bristol City Council and the Health
and Safety Executive in accordance with Regulations 5 and 6 of The
Health and Safety (Enforcing Authority) Regulations 1998.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1:
Senior Trading Standards Officer; Trading Standards Officer; North Somerset
Officers for duration of Bristol International Balloon Fiesta and other major
events taking place at Ashton Court and surrounding area as specified in S113
agreement between Bristol City Council & North Somerset Council.

G. Function: Public Health legislation, Health Protection Regulations and
Relevant Licensing or Registration
i. Public Health (Control of Disease) Act 1984 (as amended including as
amended by the Health and Social Care Act 2008) together with the
Health Protection (Local Authority Powers) Regulations 2010 and the
Health Protection (Part 2A Orders) Regulations 2010, International
Health Regulations 2005 and Health Act 2006.
ii. * Appointment of proper officers of the local authority
i. The local authority appoints a proper officer for the purpose of
receiving and forwarding information about notifications within
their area. In the majority of cases, local authorities have decided
to appoint a consultant in communicable disease control/health
protection based within the local Public Health England (PHE)
office as their proper officers.
iii. Appointment in exercise of the power conferred upon the council by
section 7 of the Sunbeds (Regulation) Act 2010 to act as an “authorised
officer” for the purposes of the said Act.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1: Neighbourhood Enforcement and Street Scene Manager; Team
Leader Neighbourhood Enforcement Team; Senior Neighbourhood

30
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Enforcement Officer; Neighbourhood Enforcement Officer; Regulatory
Services & City Events Manager; Licensing Manager; Senior Licensing Officer;
Licensing Officer.

H. Function: Pest Control
i. Authorised Functions contained in this paragraph are those arising
under legislation which confers functions upon the Council with respect
to pest control, disinfection disinfestations and public health, including
but not limited to those contained in the Prevention of Damage by Pest
Act 1949, Public Health Acts 1936 & 1961, The Environmental
Protection Act 1990 (as amended), The Clean Neighbourhoods and
Environment Act 2005.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1: Neighbourhood Enforcement and Street Scene Manager; Team
Leader Neighbourhood Enforcement Team; Senior Neighbourhood
Enforcement Officer; Neighbourhood Enforcement Officer.

I. Function: Dog Warden
i. Authorised Functions contained in this paragraph are those arising
under legislation which confers functions upon the Council with respect
to dog wardens, stray dogs, dog fouling, dangerous dogs, including but
not limited to those contained in the Dogs Act 1871, Dogs Act 1906,
Road Traffic Act 1988, Animal Health Act 1981, Environmental
Protection Act 1990 (as amended), Dangerous Dogs Act 1991, The
Clean Neighbourhoods and Environment Act 2005, The Animal Welfare
Act 2006, and other legislation of a like kind.
ii. Paragraph 13a Appointment in exercise of the power conferred upon
the council by S51 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 to act as an
inspector for the purposes of the said Act.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1: Regulatory Services & City Events Manager; Trading Standards
Manager; Senior Trading Standards Officer; Trading Standards Officer; Animal
Health Officer; Trainee/Apprentice Trading Standards Officer; Fair Trading
Officer; Trading Standards Investigator/Financial Investigator; Team Leader;
Neighbourhood Enforcement Team; Senior Neighbourhood Enforcement
Officer; Neighbourhood Enforcement Officer;

J. Function: Port Health Authority Functions
i. Authorised functions contained in this paragraph comprise functions
assigned to the Council as Port Health Authority under Paragraph 4 of
SI 2010/1214, together with all other functions, rights and liabilities of
the Council as Port Health Authority conferred by or under any other
legislation.
ii. This officer is appointed, pursuant to Regulation 12(2) of The Trade in
Animals and Related Products Regulations 2011 as an official
veterinary surgeon.
iii. This officer is appointed, pursuant to Regulation 12(4) of The Trade in
Animals and Related Products Regulations 2011 as an official fish
inspector.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1:
Regulatory Services & City Events Manager; Trading Standards Manager;
Senior Trading Standards Officer; Trading Standards Officer; Animal Health

31
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Officer; Trainee/Apprentice Trading Standards Officer; Fair Trading Officer;
Trading Standards Investigator/Financial Investigator

K. Function: Scrap Metal
i. Authorised function contained in this paragraph are those arising under
legislation which confers functions upon the Council with respect to
licensing and regulation of persons engaged scrap metal dealing
including but not limited to those contained in the Scrap Metal Dealers
Act 2013.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1: Regulatory Services & City Events Manager; Trading Standards
Manager; Senior Trading Standards Officer; Trading Standards Officer; Animal
Health Officer; Trainee/Apprentice Trading Standards Officer; Fair Trading
Officer; Trading Standards Investigator/Financial Investigator; South West
Regional Investigation Team Manager; Investigator; Neighbourhood
Enforcement and Street Scene Manager; Team Leader Neighbourhood
Enforcement Team; Senior Neighbourhood Enforcement Officer;
Neighbourhood Enforcement Officer; Licensing Manager; Senior Licensing
Officer; Licensing Officer

L. Function: Licensing Functions incl Taxi Licensing & Regulation
i. Authorised functions contained in the paragraph are those arising under
legislation which confers functions upon the Council with respect to the
Licensing and regulation of those engaged with Hackney Carriages,
Private Hire Vehicles, Private Hire Operators including but not limited to
provisions contained in the Local Government (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1976 and Town Police clauses Act 1847.
ii. All functional responsibilities in respect of Street Trading activities and
Sexual Entertainment Venue activities administered under the
provisions of the Local Government Miscellaneous Provisions Act
1982), Charity Street Collections under the provisions of the Police
Factories Etc (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1916, and collections from
houses or premises under the House to House Collections Act 1939.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1: Regulatory Services & City Events Manager; Trading Standards
Manager; Senior Trading Standards Officer; Trading Standards Officer; Animal
Health Officer; Trainee/Apprentice Trading Standards Officer; Fair Trading
Officer; Trading Standards Investigator/Financial Investigator; Licensing Team
Leader; Senior Licensing Officer; Licensing Officer; Neighbourhood
Enforcement and Street Scene Manager; Team Leader Neighbourhood
Enforcement Team; Senior Neighbourhood Enforcement Officer;
Neighbourhood Enforcement Officer; Fleet Manager; Fleet Technical
Operations Manager, Operations Manager Fleet Workshops, Workshop Co-
ordinator

M. Function: Parks Byelaws
i. Authority to exercise the duties and powers contained in Bristol City
Council’s Parks Byelaws made under section 164 of the Public Health
Act 1875, section 15 of the Open Spaces Act 1906 and sections 12 and
15 of the Open Spaces Act 1906 with respect to pleasure grounds,
public walks and open spaces. To include authority to:
i. Designate routes for the purpose of byelaws 12 and 13; (ii)
designate areas for the purpose of byelaws 9, 22 and 25; (iii)

32
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

issue consents in respect of byelaws 5, 6, 8, 9, 16, 18, 19, 26,
27, 28 and 29.
ii. Remove from the ground any person offending against any of the
byelaws.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1: Neighbourhood Enforcement and Street Scene Manager; Team
Leader Neighbourhood Enforcement Team; Senior Neighbourhood
Enforcement Officer; Neighbourhood Enforcement Officer; Area Manager-
Parks; Contract Manager- Parks; Operational Co-coordinators- Parks

N. Function: Environmental Protection, Nuisance, Clean Neighbourhoods,
Building safety, Highways Enforcement and Relevant Licensing or Registration
i. Authorised functions contained in this paragraph are those arising
under legislation which confers functions upon the Council with respect
to any of the following: waste disposal, statutory nuisance, pollution
(including but not limited to noise, air, land and water pollution),
buildings not secured against unauthorised entry, accumulations which
are detrimental to the amenity of an area, Community Protection
Notices, highways obstructions & unauthorised works or damage to
highways including but not limited to those contained in the Control of
Pollution Act 1974, Refuse Disposal (Amenity) Act 1978, Highways Act
1980, Building Act 1984, the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, the
Environmental Protection Act 1990 (as amended), the Clean Air Act
1993, Criminal Justice & Public Order Act 1994, the Noise Act 1996 (as
amended), the Pollution Prevention and Control Act 1999, the Clean
Neighbourhoods and Environment Act 2005, the Environmental
Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2010 (as amended), Anti-
social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2014. All other legislation of a
like kind under which the Council is authorised to exercise any of its
functions.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1:
Neighbourhood Enforcement and Street Scene Manager; Team Leader
Neighbourhood Enforcement Team; Senior Neighbourhood Enforcement
Officer; Neighbourhood Enforcement Officer; Waste Enforcement Officer; a
contractor. Regulatory Services & City Events Manager; Trading Standards
Manager; Senior Trading Standards Officer; Trading Standards Officer; Animal
Health Officer; Trainee/Apprentice Trading Standards Officer; Fair Trading
Officer; Trading Standards Investigator/Financial Investigator; South West
Regional Investigation Team Manager; Investigator; Investigator- Lettings Lead
Enforcement Authority; Specialist Regulatory Solicitor.

O. Function: Lead Enforcement Authority- Tenants Fees Act 2019
i. All general and enforcement responsibilities duties of the Lead
enforcement authority as conferred by the Tenants Fees Act 2019.
Post holder authorised to carry out function - subject to limitations in
Appendix 1: Regulatory Services & City Events Manager;; Investigator-
Lettings Lead Enforcement Authority; Specialist Regulator Solicitor.

P. Function: Psychoactive Substances Act 2016
i. Issuing of Prohibition Orders

33
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

Post holder authorised to carry out function subject to limitations in
Appendix 1: Regulatory Services & City Events Manager, Neighbourhood
Enforcement and Street Scene Manager

Appendix 1
Schedule of Posts and Limitations of Regulatory Functions
Post Limitation
Neighbourhood Enforcement and A, D, L, M, P
Street Scene Manager
Team Leader Neighbourhood A, B, D, L, M, P
Enforcement
Senior Neighbourhood Enforcement A, B, D, L, M, P
Officer
Neighbourhood Enforcement Officer A, B, D, L, M,
Waste Enforcement Officer A, B, D, L
Regulatory Services & City Events A, F, G, P
Manager
Director Management of Place A, F, G
Trading Standards Manager A, C, F, G,
Senior Trading Standards Officers A, B, H, I,
Trading Standards Officer A, B, F, G, H, I,
Fair Trading Officer A, B, C
Animal Health Officer A, B, C, F, G, H, I
Trainee/Apprentice Trading Standards A, B, C, F, G, J,
Officer
Trading Standards A, B, C, F, G,
Investigator/Financial Investigator
South West Regional Investigation A, C
Team Manager
Investigator A, B, C, H, I
Investigator- Lettings Lead A, B, C, F, G
Enforcement Authority
Intelligence Officer- Lettings Lead A, B, C, F, G
Enforcement Authority
Senior Manager, Powys A, C, F, G
Operations Manager, Powys A, B, C, F, G
Investigators, Powys A, B, C, F, G
Licensing Manager A,
Senior Licensing Officer A, B, L
Licensing Officer A, B, L

Limitations

Institution of Proceedings & Disposal.

(A) This authorisation shall not extend to the institution of proceedings, save in
respect of proceedings instituted by inspectors under Health & Safety Work,
etc. Act 1974, where the power to institute proceedings shall be subject to prior
consultation with the Council’s Head of Legal Services or his duly authorised
representative.

34
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

(B) This authorisation shall not extend to the giving of Home Office cautions, such
as Simple Cautions.

Weights & Measures.

(C) This authorisation shall not extend to the exercise of any function contained in
the Weights and Measures Act 1985.

Environmental Protection, Clean Neighbourhoods etc

(D) Save with the prior express permission of the Council’s Executive Director:
Growth and Regeneration, this authorisation shall not extend to the exercise of
any power of the Council in its capacity as the Local Planning Authority other
than enforcement action arising under Sections 215 & 330 of the Town and
Country Planning Act 1990.

Food Safety, Agriculture and Port Health.

(E) This authorisation shall not extend to the undertaking of any Food Hygiene
activities which the Authorised Officer has not satisfied the Council that s/he is
suitably qualified, competent and appropriately trained to satisfy the provisions
of the Food Law Code of Practice.

(F) This authorisation shall not extend to the undertaking of any Food Standards
activities which the Authorised Officer has not satisfied the Council that s/he is
suitably qualified, competent and appropriately trained having regard to the
Guidelines contained in the Food Law Code of Practice.

(G) This authorisation shall not extend to the undertaking of any Feed Law
activities which the Authorised Officer has not satisfied the Council that s/he is
suitably qualified, experienced and competent having regard to the Guidelines
contained in the Feed Law Code of Practice.

Health & Safety.

(H) This appointment shall not extend to sections 21, 22, 25 and 39 of the Health
& Safety at Work etc. Act 1974, unless they are suitably qualified having
regard to HSE guidance

(I) This appointment is limited to the powers specified in section 20 (2) (a) (c) (d)
(f) (g) (l) and (k) of the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 for the express
purposes of taking environmental, chemical or physical samples, as well as
the making of any such scientific examination (including taking measurements,
photographs, examining documentation, and the like) as may be required by a
fully authorised Health and Safety inspector in the course of their
investigations.

Trainee /Apprentice Officers & Contractors.

(J) The exercise of any powers conferred upon the Officer by virtue of this
Scheme shall only be exercisable when under the supervision or direction of a
fully authorised and competent colleague.

35
OFFICIAL
Approved June 2026. Published June 2026

(K) This authorisation shall not extend to the service of any notices for which a
failure to comply may result in an offence or the taking of any other legal action
by the council, except under the supervision or direction of a fully authorised
and competent colleague.

Neighbourhood Enforcement Officers.

(L) Authorisation shall not extend beyond provisions relating to the Health Act
2006 and smoking legislation made thereunder.

Parks Byelaws

(M) This authorisation shall not extend to (i) designating routes for the purpose of
byelaws 12 and 13; (ii) designating areas for the purpose of byelaws 9, 22 and 25;
(iii) issuing consents in respect of byelaws 5, 6, 8, 9, 16, 18, 19, 26, 27, 28 and 29.

(N) This authorisation shall not extend to removal from the ground of any
person offending against any of the byelaws.

(O) Authorisations under Paragraph 16 shall not extended provisions relating to
the service of notices in relation to S43-58 of the Anti-Social Behaviour, Crime
& Policing Act 2014.

Authorised by:

John Smith
Executive Director Growth and Regeneration

Dated: 3 June 2026

36
OFFICIAL
