Statements to the 27 March 2026 Joint meeting - West of England
Combined Authority Committee and West of England Joint Committee

Statement 1 – Jacqueline Perkins

I'm writing to oppose the SBLN proposed changes in any form. Southville/ Bedminster is
already a low traffic neighbourhood where it is safe to cycle, scoot, walk and also for
cars to drive through as needed. I live on one of the residential roads which is proposed
to become a main thoroughfare from Coronation Road to North Street, with the
proposed closure of some of the surrounding main through roads (Dean Lane) and the
far wider roads where traffic could sensibly be routed (Stackpool). I'd like to add that
I'm a daily pedestrian, cyclist and a very occasional car user when needed.

Our road is not currently busy, but the proposed changes would make it much busier
and more polluted with the potential for gridlock traffic queuing to access Dean Lane/
North Street at busier times of the day, particularly with the lack of alternative roads for
drivers to take.

These changes are ill conceived and will do nothing to reduce the amount of time
people spend in their cars. The reality will be that people are forced to take longer
routes with more idling in slow traffic and will increase pollution on the 'boundary'
roads, leading to poorer health outcomes for residents, particularly our children.
Emergency vehicles and carers will be dramatically slowed down from reaching their
destinations, or not able to complete their journeys within a reasonable time. The knock
on detrimental impact on local businesses is also likely to be huge - it could kill the
independent high street which is one of the main attractions of our neighbourhood as
people who visit our area from across the city will be less likely to visit.

There is no viable alternative for people who aren't mobile enough to cycle/ walk as
public transport is unreliable, prohibitively expensive and often means travelling into
the centre of town to then catch another bus out to where you need to go. As we have
seen in the EBLN, this means that people will continue to use their cars and will just be
taking longer journeys. Taxis are less likely to accept fares in the SBLN or otherwise
charge a premium for those who need to use them. This will disproportionately affect
elderly and disabled people, and I'd like to know what has been done regarding an
equalities impact assessment around this?

The tragic death of a cyclist on North Street recently due to one dangerous driver should
not be used as an argument to support these changes. I've seen this argument played
out in the press and statements by supporters of the scheme and it has no relevance to
the SBLN. It was a one off accident, due to one irresponsible driver. Accidents like this
will continue to happen when bad drivers make bad decisions - but implementing these
road blocks will make North Street even busier with more cars being forced to take that
route.

This enormous amount of funding could be much better used improving road surfaces,
pavements and cycle lanes, and most importantly investing in our public transport
networks across the city.

Statement 2 – Barney Harris

I am writing to give my emphatic support for the trial EBLN scheme that
has, since it's implementation, gifted my family and my community safer,
cleaner and more useable streets. Prior to the EBLN, witnessing bitter
road rage and arguments, near misses, or—sadly—serious traffic
accidents, was a near daily occurrence for my children and I. Those
deciding on whether this scheme should become permanent should know that
all the available data support the idea that the scheme has reduced
traffic, reduced pollution and increased safety. Whilst it is not
universally popular, survey data also show that the majority of
residents within the EBLN scheme area either support or are indifferent
to the scheme. Looking elsewhere in the UK we see that, despite initial
opposition (and in all but a minority of cases), such schemes—once
permanent—quickly become popular with local residents due to the
enhanced quality of life they offer.

Given these facts, if members of the committee are hesitant to implement
the scheme, it is for political reasons, and there's no denying that
this scheme has become overtly political. Opposition to the scheme is
not exclusive to any political outlook but the anti-EBLN message has
taken up enthusiastically by insurgent radical-right, anti-immigrant
political movements [redacted by Democratic Services]. I ask this committee to stand
against the conspiracy, division and vacuous populist politics that
these groups embody, and choose to follow the evidence by implementing
this scheme permanently. The present and future residents of East
Bristol will thank you.

Statement 3 – Angharad Hughes

I have lived in the northern end of the EBLN for the last 40 years and I've certainly
noticed the increase in rat running and accidents over those years.
In the last few years there have been three cats killed in my road and I'm just grateful
that none of the many many children who live here have been knocked over
Since the installation of the EBLN things have changed dramatically in this area I
haven't seen the figures yet but I feel the air quality is much better. It certainly much
quieter and motorists are much more pleasant probably because they are neighbours
and locals rather than people trying to get back-and-forth to their workplace at speed.
I expect as Beaconsfield Road is The road people need to go down to get to Northcote
Langley and glebe Road. There is actually more traffic but of course it's not going at high
speed. It's not Screeching to a halt. People are not getting out of their cars and shouting
and screaming at each other.
As a disabled person, I feel much safer. I have increased my Walking and Bus journeys
and use my car less, but when I need to use my car, I have no difficulty It's easy to get
out of the road. I don't find there are many delays my journey time takes slightly longer if
I go down Church Road or up Blackswarth Road which I do regularly. When going to
Redfield, I often find it easier and quicker to go on foot or on the bus rather than try and
drive down and find parking I often walk down Beaufort Road or through the cemetery
and it's so much quieter. You can hear the birds and it's safe to stop and talk to your
neighbours without continually looking around to see if there's cars mounting the
pavement.
I know that friends feel much safer walking and cycling with their children to school.
I do understand that there have been tiny and very varied changes to response times by
the fire service but I think the changes proposed, will help that and reassure people.
We had a fire in a side street a few weeks ago and the fire service attended very
promptly and did a great job. It's not unusual down my road to have to call the
ambulance service and once again they appear promptly and do their work well. On
occasions it has meant that people have not been able to drive back to their homes
until the incident has cleared. They may have to park elsewhere and walk a small
distance. It might be irritating, but it's not life-threatening.
Of course we all feared that our journey times would be much longer, but I understand
that the figures actually show that journey numbers have decreased already One area
that needs to be improved soon is the junction between Chalk's Road Blackswarth
Road and Church Road. I understand this was already under discussion and hopefully
will be going ahead soon. This will further decrease journey times.
The situation at the Barton Hill end of the scheme is also planned to have some
changes and hopefully they will solve some of the issues that may have arisen. For
example it has become more difficult to drive to wellspring which I have to do
occasionally and although I have managed, I think the changes to Bus gate may
improve that for all of us.
I think it is worth noting that there is a small number of extremely angry anti- EBLN
protesters in that area. People who want to openly support the EBLN can find
themselves abused and threatened.
I would like to make a vote for most of it becoming permanent. It is meant a great deal
to myself in terms of safety and quality of life.
Statement 4 – Sabrina Salter

Hello,
I would like to formally send you my support for the East Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood (EBLN) and I strongly encourage you to support its full implementation
in the Summer following the end of the trial period.
I moved to St George in summer 2020 and live off Beaufort Road. My daughter was born
in December 2020.
Prior to the implementation of the EBLN it was impossible to navigate Beaufort Road
during rush hour. Cars were mounting the pavement because two-way traffic was trying
to navigate a narrow road. Cars were gridlocked and honking at each other constantly.
This was not a safe environment for myself or my daughter to travel around our
neighbourhood and it led to a horrible air quality.
In the final weeks before the implementation of the EBLN, I started cycling my daughter
to nursery. One the way home that first time I almost got run off the road, with my
daughter on the back of the bicycle, by a car who refused to move over, despite the fact
that the road was icy and I was struggling to keep us upright. If the EBLN had not been
implemented, I would have stopped cycling my daughter to nursery, as it just wasn't
safe.
I know walk, cycle and take the bus more often than I use the car because the EBLN has
made the area safer for active travel. I use the bike to take my daughter to swimming
lessons at Easton Leisure Centre weekly because it is genuinely quicker going down
through the EBLN than trying to drive to Easton via Church Road. I also use the bus or
cycle to my own exercise classes or gym sessions at Easton. I can only do this because
the EBLN stretches from St. George down Victoria Road to Cobden Street. This Wesley
Way Cycle Route has become instrumental for the community.
The neighbourhood is also much safer for my daughter to run around. We now have an
active 5 year old who likes to run to school every morning. Taking her to school via
Beaufort, I'm no longer terrified that some car is going to mount the pavement while she
is running ahead.
I know there has been a lot of angry feeling about the EBLN online. But at a recent
protest march only 7 people turned up! The people who are against the EBLN are using
online bully tactics, including leveraging personal CCTV footage, to silence anyone who
supports the scheme. Many of us have stopped trying to engage online as a result. I
hope you take these statements instead as evidence of the weight of support that exists
for the scheme rather than the noise of people online.

Statement 5 – Melissa Jayne Topping

Statement for the Formal Review of the EBLN and Objection to Permanent TROs with
'changes' to trial.
I am writing this today from not only myself, but also from a community harmed. For
confirmation of this, please see attached PhD thesis by Sara Melasecchi (UWE, 2026). I
draw your attention specifically to the sections on 'Procedural Injustice' and 'Low-
Motility Residents' which directly reflect the issues raised in my statement.

This submission constitutes a formal objection from BEDS (Bristol East Disabled
Society) regarding the proposed permanent changes to the EBLN. Our objection is now
supported by independent academic evidence from the PhD thesis “Justice Through
Capabilities: an investigation into the social impacts of the East Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood” (Melasecchi, 2026, UWE).

We don't want minimal changes that help very few, we want Equality throughout our
community.

This research confirms that the EBLN has resulted in systemic "distributional injustice,"
specifically penalising those with "low motility" (disabled and elderly residents) while
privileging a narrow demographic of able-bodied residents.

1. The "Baked In" Procedural Failure.
We object on the grounds of procedural unfairness.
1. The Melasecchi research identifies that the EBLN’s core traffic restrictions were
"baked in" as pre-defined solutions before meaningful consultation occurred.
* The Gunning Principles: Consultation must occur when proposals are at a formative
stage. Evidence now shows that Council planners felt "fear" in sharing details early on,
leading to a "tokenistic" process where disabled voices were dismissed as "resistant to
progress" rather than being heard as experts of their own lived experience.
* Request to WECA: We urge the WECA review to investigate how funding requirements
and pre-determined institutional goals overrode the statutory duty to consult with the
disabled community in good faith.

2. Breach of the Public Sector Equality Duty (Section 149, Equality Act 2010)
The proposed transition to permanent camera enforcement does not rectify the
functional severance of our neighbourhood.
* Access to Healthcare: The PhD research highlights that the scheme fails to provide
"real opportunities and freedoms" for those who rely on vehicles. Increasing journey
times to GP surgeries is not a "minor inconvenience"; for a disabled person, it is a
physical and financial barrier to essential care.
* Institutionalised Isolation: The research confirms that the EBLN has caused "social
division and ghettoisation." By maintaining these barriers, the authority is
institutionalising the isolation of the disabled by obstructing the "informal support
networks" (friends and family) that the study identifies as vital for community resilience.

3. Misalignment with the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984.
Section 122 requires the "expeditious, convenient and safe movement of vehicular
traffic."
* Disproportionate Impact: The relocation of the Avonvale bus gate remains an arbitrary
barrier. The Melasecchi study notes that the scheme caters to "gentrified" areas while
neglecting the mobility needs of diverse, deprived areas like Barton Hill. The current
layout prioritises "leisure cycling" for the high-motility demographic over the "essential
survival mobility" of disabled residents.

4. Socio-Economic Impact and the "Blue Badge Paradox".
The research identifies a "tailored narrowing" of what constitutes legitimate mobility.
* Economic Exclusion: For disabled entrepreneurs, the replacement of planters with
cameras merely replaces a physical wall with a "financial penalty." This acts as a "tax
on disability." For the disabled, elderly, mobility impaired, their families, friends and
carers.
* Logistical "Dead-Zones": As the research notes, the displacement of traffic onto
boundary roads creates congestion that discourages couriers and carers from entering
the area, leading to failed deliveries and missed appointments—a reality the current
TRO ignores.

5. Failure to Address Safety: Speed vs. Access.
We support safer streets, but the PhD evidence shows that the EBLN focuses on the
wrong target.
* Epistemic Injustice: Authorities have dismissed resident knowledge regarding speed.
We demand a shift from "modal filters" (which block access) to speed-calming
measures (raised tables/chicanes). This would allow safe vehicular access for
residents and carers while deterring through-traffic—a solution the Melasecchi study
suggests would better serve a "Just Transition."

6. Specific Site Evidence: Byron Street and One-Way Restrictions.
The current design forces disabled residents to perform dangerous manoeuvres or drive
illegally through one-way signs to reach their homes. The physical evidence—the "dents
in nearly every car" on Byron Street—proves that these routes are not viable or safe.
Designing a scheme that requires a disabled citizen to break the law to access their
home is a fundamental failure of governance.

Formal Request for Evidence Inclusion.

I formally request that this statement, along with the attached PhD thesis (Melasecchi,
2026), be forwarded immediately to the independent review team commissioned by
WECA. It is vital that this review is not limited to Council-led data, which we contend is
based on a 'baked in' and flawed foundation. For the review to be truly independent and
robust, it must incorporate this academic analysis of the scheme’s social impacts and
the specific, documented failings regarding the Public Sector Equality Duty (PSED). I
expect confirmation that this evidence has been received and will be weighted
accordingly in the final review findings.

Conclusion and Formal Request.

Whilst we acknowledge the scheme has created quieter streets, and for a few this is
enjoyed. Sadly this is far outweighed by the lived experience of many who are suffering
a severe negative impact. As now evidenced in Sara.s research.

With active travel being safe prior to EBLN, this behaviour is all even harder to accept.

The Melasecchi research concludes that the EBLN has failed to convert urban
intervention into improved well-being for the most vulnerable. It has created
"environmental privilege" for some at the cost of "spatial injustice" for others.
This now meaning many vulnerable residents, from all protected characteristics, are
left with an Unliveable life. Lone women, the disabled, elderly, mobilty impaired, low
paid workers, worshippers, the list goes on.

We formally request that WECA and the Highway Authority:
* Refuse the Permanent TRO in its current form.
* Scrap camera-enforced gates that penalise essential access.
* Initiate a "Co-Design" process with BEDS, as recommended by the principles of the
Capability Approach, to ensure a transition that is inclusive by design, rather than
discriminatory by consequence.

Sustainability without justice is merely segregation. We urge you to use the
commissioned review to correct these "baked in" failings.
Please find attached the Melasecchi 2026 thesis for your perusal and reference [this
attachment was removed by Democratic Services].

Thank you for your time on this matter.

Statement 6 – Councillor Rob Bryher

I write to express my continuing support for the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
trial scheme in line with the evidence gathered by Bristol City Council.

I am a local councillor for St George West, part of which is within the trial scheme area. I
supported the scheme in the lead-up to the previous Labour administration choosing to
implement it in March 2024 and I continue to do so under the current Green-led
administration.

The aims of the scheme as defined in the monitoring strategy are:
• to reduce traffic cutting through the Liveable Neighbourhood
• to boost active travel and public transport use
• to not significantly impact nearby roads

If we dig into the data, it shows us a few things:
• The volume of traffic has reduced and has not significantly impacted nearby
(external/boundary) roads: On internal and external (boundary) roads, the
volume of all motorised vehicles has gone down by 26 per cent on weekdays and
by 21 per cent on weekends. On internal roads the decrease is 77 per cent on
weekdays and 72 per cent on weekends. On external roads the decrease is 6 per
cent on weekdays and 5 per cent on weekends.
• Walking has been boosted: Walking increased by 7 per cent on weekdays and 5
per cent on weekends.
• Cycling has been boosted: Cycling volumes increased overall by 22 per cent on
weekdays but did not go up overall at weekends. The volume of cycling on
internal roads increased by 39 per cent on weekdays and 13 per cent on
weekends, and it went up on external roads by 4 per cent on weekdays and went
down by 12 per cent on external roads on weekends. Use of the Wesley Way
cycle route increased by 60 per cent on weekdays and 24 per cent on weekends.
• Public transport has been boosted: The 5 and 16 buses (which run mainly
through the EBLN area) have increased their patronage by 116% and all buses
(41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 5, 16) which run through EBLN and boundary roads (e.g.
Church Road) have seen a 5% increase in ridership.

In summary, the data shows that the trial scheme has achieved its aims in each of the
three categories.

This clearly suggests that simply removing the scheme in its entirety would not be a
wise course of action (if you believe the scheme aims are desirable). Bristol City
Council has consulted on some initial changes to the trial scheme (in line with the data
and resident feedback) and will draw up a permanent scheme design which will go to
the transport and connectivity policy committee in summer 2026.

As well as advocating for the existing trial scheme, I implore the West of England
Combined Authority Mayor and local authority leaders to loudly and publicly champion
and fund additional Child Safe Travel Area schemes (also known as liveable
neighbourhood schemes) across the sub-region and use their positions to advocate for
greater funding from the UK Government for this vital work.

Statement 7 – Salem Bennett

I have lived half of my life in Bartonhill (starting in 1991), I wasn't sure I'd live to the same
age as the average person in this country because city kids like me who grow up below
the bread line don't do we? Part of that is that healthier diets tend to be more expensive
and that's before we get into the costs of dentistry in this country etc
An aspect of this though is the pollution. I have memories of my parents telling me to
hold my breath when walking through heavy amounts of traffic on Marsh Lane. Why?
Because children have smaller lungs more susceptible to toxic air. This is the kind of
things that results in more kids who have asthma. There is a reason we don't let kids
smoke so why should we be fine with them breathing in a load of exhaust fumes?
I left Bristol for a few years and when I came back in 2016 I saw the city was trying to
change this via things like the Resident Parking Zones. The areas that have them are
nice but they're all pretty middle class. I was overjoyed when I learned about the EBLN
because at last people were saying measures to improve air quality should be for
everyone.
I hope for a day when it doesn't matter if a kid is from Bartonhill or Cotham they have
the same chance at a healthy life and part of that has to be breathable air. We are
getting there. No longer do we have tons of vehicles going through residential areas like
Marsh Lane and especially no more lorries cutting through the area to get to Feeder
Road.

Statement 8 – Siobhan Wright

I am writing to you as the decision over to make the EBLN permanent is imminent. I am
a resident of Beaufort Rd and have felt hugely positive impact from the introduction of
the scheme. Historically my road was an angry and unsafe environment. Cars would
regularly beep horns and mount pavements, using the road as a rat run. Now the
environment is safe and happy, people walk and cycle and have time to say hello, as
they are not enraged with traffic concerns. It has created a close community with
neighbours holding conversations.
My travel habits have changed for the better. I used to regularly use my car for short
journeys, but now opt to use public transport. I use the buses and trains for journeys
into town. My 9 year old son now cycles to school every day. Due to the improved
safety and sense of community on my road I allow my son to cycle to and from school
alone, something I didn’t allow his older sisters to do, due to the danger and anger on
the road.
There has been negativity about the scheme, however in my experience now that we are
over the teething problems and initial traffic disruption has calmed, there is a strong
positive view from local residents. The only continued negativity is coming from the rat-
runners, who used our residential streets as short-cuts.
There have been positive improvements to public transport with new bus routes being
added. This is a positive outcome and hopefully the sign of what is to come.
I conclude my message with a request to make the scheme permanent because of the
positive impact it has had on my community.
Statement 9 – Rosa Kell

Whilst we support the delivery of Bus priority measures on the A37 from Farringdon
Gurney ,Pensford whitchurch Hengrove Knowle Totterdown Bristol Temple meads
Bristol bus and coach station to whiteladies Road ,Clifton Down station, Blackboy hill
Southmead Henbury cribbs causeway.
And the A4 Portway from Bristol city centre Harbourside Hotwells Portway park and ride
interchange station.
We very concerned about the funding Gap in 2026 to 2029 Bus grant funding reduction
from the Department for Transport from 2025 to 2026 with West of England mayoral
combined transport Authority and North Somerset council from £57 to £51 million
pounds.
This has resulted in Temporary contracts on Bus services
4th April till 2026 July 2025
Are set to cancel the service on 26 th July 2026
K 1 keynsham Town service
P1 Bristol to Winsford
534 Filton college to East Bristol
2v Bath spa Park and ride to Timsbury Paulton Midsomer Norton westfield Radstock,
X91 Bristol South Bristol to the Chew valley,
99 Chew valley local service
25 Bristol city centre St werburges St Paul's Eastville park Fishponds.
Y8 Yate bus station, Yate railway station yate bus station, chipping Sodbury Wickwar
Charfield Wotton under Edge for Stroud Merry Walk bus and coach station,
X10 Bristol Southmead hospital,bus and coach station, Cribbs causeway bus
station,Portishead Clevedon and Yatton Railway station.
522
The following service has connection being withdrawn with some journeys withdrawn
Bristol bus and coach station ,Bristol Temple meads station, Arnos vale Bristlington
keynsham Timsbury Paulton, midsomer Norton Westfield Radstock Peasdown st john
Bath spa bus and coach station.
But Sulis RUH hospital lost it bus link for the Somer valley.
With connection via Chilcompton or Shepton mallet interchange to Wells Bus and
coach station 173 174
Lost of th Bristol bus and coach station to Bristol city centre, Harbourside Hotwells
Ashton Gate, clevedon Dial Hill x7
With no west link after 2 30 in that are
Service 50 Bristol city centre to Easton ,Stapleton Bristol road station Eastville
Stapleton village Frenchay is reduced down to just 4 peak Hour services shopping
journey.
The 25 could replace the service from Bristol city centre, St Paul's st werburges
Eastville Stapleton Blackberry Hill To Fishponds.
16 5 could be rerouted in the Bristlington and St Anne's Park to replace service 61 .
We are concern about the lack of public consultation with public Transport users that is
required by the Department for Transport to public transport bus user and stakeholders
forums.
With a report by 20 th March 2026
With some of these changes it's impossible to get to Work school College university
heath provision Hospitals basic food shopping leisure facilities, coach services and
stations and Railway stations
We would ask Bristol city Council to talk to Banes ,south Gloucestershire county
council North Somerset council, Gloucestershire county council and Somerset
Wiltshire Council Swindon Borough and West of England mayoral combined transport
Authority and North Somerset bus improvement plan about theses bus cut, and funding
beyond 26th July 2026 .
On Railway we need to get the 6 voyager train unit in service that our off lease at Derby
needed for Bristol Temple Meads station Bristol Parkway to Birmingham New street
Manchester piccadilly Edinburgh Waverley and Plymouth North Road inter city cross
country train Arriva 1sq capital services.
And make progress on Lift Bridge interchange in the Bristol city Region at Parson street,
weston super mare, Bristol Lawrence hill, Bristol Stapleton road, Nalisea and
Backwell, Cheltenham spa, Bridgwater, castle cary for Glastonbury festival site Yeovil
Junction.
We must see more passengers consultation by the west of England mayoral combined
transport Authority and North Somerset council and Somerset unitary council working
together with Peninsula Transport Board and Western Gateway Transport Board on
Regional bus issues.
On Railway we like to see
Improvement to Metro west railway Network from Exeter St Davids station, Cullompton,
Tiverton, Wellington, Taunton, Bridgwater Highbridge and Burnham on sea,
uphill weston super mare,weston Milton, Worle parkway Yatton for clevedon, Nalisea
and Backwell Parson street Bedminster Bristol Temple meads station to Clifton Down,
Avonmouth Dock seven Beach line,
We would like to see a half hourly service on this metro west route
With. All the new development at Bridgwater the Batteries factory and Hinckley point c
With new station planned at Cullompton, Wellington, and Development and uphill but
with North Somerset council joining the West of England mayoral combined transport
Authority and the from West country Transport plan covering Western Gateway
Transport Board and Peninsula Transport Board we need. a Transport Plan for south
west England
We need to talk to First Group plc Greater Western trains company limited GWR and
Arriva Cross country trains arriva 1sq capital service
But also lumo Railways by First group on it Paignton to London Paddington service to
stop more trains on this route and co op rail with its Taunton, Bridgwater, Highbridge
and Burnham on weston super mare new train services and Taunton to castle cary for
Yeovil pen mill,Bruton Frome Westbury Trowbridge Melksham chippingham and
Swindon.
And we need office of road and Rail support from the First group plc Greater Western
trains company limited GWR
Bristol Temple Meads station, Bath spa Chippenham and Swindon.
We need this train service given permission by ORR

Statement 10 – Ian Pond

In most places, shared micromobility (e-bikes & e-scooters or IMS) can be considered
as a first mile/last mile adjunct to the mass transit system. For our region, without mass
transit, it needs to deliver much more to help enable our economy and reduce
congestion & transport carbon. The terms of the tender contract & the choice of
provider are critical to achieving that. Unlike the lead-times & cost of building a mass
transit system, improving our region’s transport ecosystem with better, more affordable
& available shared micromobility services can be achieved rapidly & at virtually no cost.
It is therefore incumbent on our region to get this right when the current operating
contract is re-tendered.
The last re-tendering was a disaster and has set back progress in our region massively.
The meeting report states that “number of daily trips now regularly exceeds 10,000”,
however in the year to July 2023 the average was almost 15,000 daily trips (source DfT
published data), at that time there were more vehicles on our region’s streets and end
user prices were considerably lower. Why did this happen?... because it seems that IMS
was deemed to be a money-making scheme, rather than an intrinsic part of our region’s
transport mix.
If delivered well, shared micromobility can help grow our economy, reduce private car
usage (& the associated pollution & congestion), and augment & complement our
region’s buses & trains, without inconveniencing & endangering people with pavement
trip hazards. This means making sure it is focused on:
- Affordability: end user pricing set at bus use levels, ideally with integrated ticketing.
- Accessibility: high density of unobstructive parking zones, not on pavements
- Social Equity: availability & pricing weighted towards areas of transport & economic
deprivation
- Inclusivity: greater availability of e-bikes which are preferred to e-scooters by women
& older people
- Cost neutrality – WECA’s fees & commission to cover management & monitoring only,
not penalise users
When considering this item, the WECA committee should require that the delegated
powers come with an obligation to deliver a 2027 tender framework that is structured to
achieve these goals.
Additionally this must be backed up by a commitment by the CA & UA’s to building
more safe, continuous cycle routes and to re-allocating on-street car parking to shared
micromobility parking zones to make these services more safe, attractive & convenient
to use.

Statement 11 – Siobhan Martin

I am a resident of East Bristol, and I am asking WECA not to provide further funding to
make the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood permanent.

Since the trial began, the scheme has had significant unintended consequences for
those living and working within the boundary of the scheme and also on the surrounding
communities. Some businesses have reported a sharp fall in custom. Traffic and
pollution have increased on key roads including Blackswarth Road, Netham Road,
Troopers Hill Road and Crews Hole Road plus others. These routes now carry displaced
traffic from the restricted areas, and residents are experiencing longer journey times,
higher fuel costs, and greater wear and tear on their vehicles, this impacts the poorest
in society and leaving many feeling cut off from society. The additional pressure on
these roads is also contributing to faster deterioration of the road surface, with
potholes reappearing shortly after being patched, creating hazards for all road users.

The restrictions on Beaufort Road have had a particularly negative impact on Troopers
Hill Road and Crews Hole Road during peak times, especially in the evenings. These
roads were already narrow, steep, and difficult to navigate; the increased volume of
traffic has made them more congested and more dangerous.

It is also important to highlight that there is no public transport provision along Crews
Hole Road. The nearest bus stops require walking up steep routes such as Strawberry
Lane or Troopers Hill, or using an unlit towpath to reach St Anne’s or Netham
roads. Both Strawberry Lane and the tow path are isolated routes. For many residents,
including older people, disabled people, and those travelling in the dark, these routes
are simply not safe or practical. The Liveable Neighbourhood has therefore not provided
viable alternatives to car use for those who live in this part of the city.

Residents are also reporting an increase in road-rage incidents and frustration as
drivers attempt to navigate longer, more complicated routes. This is not the outcome
that was promised.

Meanwhile, money allocated to the scheme has been spent on painted road and
pavement artwork that has quickly become worn, dirty, and damaged. This does not
represent good value for public funds.

What residents consistently say they need are practical, everyday improvements:

• Safe pedestrian crossing points

• Adequate street lighting where none currently exists

• Potholes repaired properly and promptly

• Sensible traffic-calming measures such as speed humps or raised tables

• Enforcement to prevent pavement parking, which remains a problem on roads
such as Beaufort Road including weekends, this is not commuter parking.

These are the kinds of interventions that would genuinely improve safety, accessibility,
and quality of life for people in East Bristol. The various consultations have been clearly
weighted in favour of the scheme and at no time has the question “Do you want the
scheme to remain or be removed?” been asked, despite Bristol City Councils own
consultation whereby there were 760 objections v 427 in support. Then there were the
planters and bus gates installed at night with the police and security deployed to
prevent protests. This has created to sense of imposition rather than collaboration.
What is just as concerning is the push to proceed with a South Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood, despite strong opposition there and whilst the East Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood is neither in a trial or permanent but still in place.

More recently a local Green councillor has suggested renaming Liveable
Neighbourhoods and the East Liveable Neighbourhood Scheme as School Safe Travel
Areas as the roads are likely to be safer and less polluted. This does not align with the
children who attend St Patricks on Blackswarth Road which is more congested and less
safe as a result of this scheme. The very same councillor suggests the East Bristol
Liveable Neighbourhood has boosted walking, cycling, bus travel at the same time as
reducing traffic. However, the data is flawed as Crews Hole Road was not monitored
for traffic levels or pollution before or during the trial as confirmed by the Liveable
Neighbourhoods team. The nearest traffic monitor camera is a little over 1,000 feet
away from the start of Crews Hole Road. This is camera number 43 which is located on
Blackswarth Road / Fireclay which has reported a 12% increase in traffic levels and no
increase in walking or cycling. This camera also does not taken in to account traffic
movement from east to west along Crews Hole Road that only travels as far as the
industrial units, Riverside nursing home or Wheelers Mill Close and therefore, not
picked up by camera 43.

In addition to boost bus travel during the trial period Bristol City Council sent residents
within the scheme 15 First Bus tickets. How were the free tickets accounted for in the
data figures? Incidentally, the leaflet accompanying the scheme did not make it clear
the tickets were only redeemable for 6 months, in fact there was no date referencing a
redemption time scale. Once redeemed the tickets were then valid for 12 months from
the date of redemption. Unfortunately, residents who were not aware of the
redemption time frame and who have tried to use the tickets during 2026 have found
the voucher codes are no longer valid. Why did Bristol City Council not make this clear
on the leaflet and why are they not prepared to provide replacement voucher codes for
those residents who have now missed out on the opportunity to use their tickets?

For these reasons, I am asking WECA to withhold further funding for the East Bristol
Liveable Neighbourhood and instead prioritise investment in measures that address the
real, practical needs of the communities affected.
Statement 12 – Ian Beckey

We very very concerned about the loss of the 50 bus from Bristol city centre,
Broadmead, Stapleton Road Railway station, Eastville Park Stapleton village and
Frenchay from the 4th April 2026

The bus goes from hourly service 7am to 7 pm Monday to Saturday to 4 buses a day for
shopping journeys only despite the Government bus Act No.2 England saying that
mayoral combined transport Authority and Transport Authority should give prIority to
journeys to work, school, college, university and hospital NHS facilities of which there
are four facilities.

We would like the mayor Helen Goodwin to re-route bus 25 from Bristol city centre,
Broadmead shopping centre, Haymaket, St Paul's, St Werburghs, Eastville park to
Stapleton village Blackberry Hill then to Fishponds or operate the bus as loop around
Fishponds and Frenchay.

Stapleton road has3 min bus service so why do we subsidise via this route apart for
Stapleton road Station.

We urgently this bus service will be reviewed and peak journeys added with 25 reroute

We are concern that the 61 Bristlington to Barton Hill Bristol service is withdraw with
rerouting bus 36 St Anne's park Brislington Hungerford road knowle Hengrove hospital
imperial park Hartcliffe Highridge service or services 5 from st Anne's park to Bristol.

We hope theses issues can be urgently addressed

With

Temporary bus service till 26 th July 2026

Services Y 8 Wotton under Edge Charfield Wickwar chipping Sodbury Yate bus
station,Yate railway station yate Park and ride Hawkesbury Upton fo

K1 Keynsham Town service

P1 Bristol to Winsford

X91 Bristol, city centre south Bristol Chew valley.

99 Chew valley.

594 Filton to East Bristol.

40 Avonmouth to cribbs causeway.

25 Bristol city centre to st Paul's st werburges Eastville park Fishponds.
2v Bath odd park and ride site to Timsbury Paulton Midsomer Norton westfield
Radstock.

Hope look urgently at theses bus cut discussion and reinstated

Statement 13 – Emily Arnold

I am a North Somerset resident in the vicinity of Bristol airport and have grave concerns
about the impact of the airport’s expansion plans; in terms of its impact on the
surrounding environment, for residents, habitat and wildlife, and the pressures on the
existing transport infrastructure, which already struggles to cope with airport traffic. I
don’t believe that any further expansion plans should even be considered until a green,
mass transport scheme has been agreed upon with a plan and completion date in
place.

Statement 14 – Matthew Symonds

As a resident of Southville of over thirty years, who also happens to be a car driver and
car owner, cyclist, pedestrian, and dog walker, I regularly experience moving around
Southville on foot, bike and car. I wholeheartedly disagree with the arguments made by
those opposing the South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhoods plans that 'Southville is
already a low-traffic neighbourhood' - it is patently not. The whole neighbourhood is
dominated by cars, and cars are given priority over those who walk and cycle.

I'm not 'anti-car', that would be odd as someone who has to drive thousands of miles
each year for my work - but I firmly believe cars, vans, lorries etc. and drivers really
should not have priority over pedestrians and cyclists. The balance in Southville is
currently tipped strongly in favour of drivers - this is simply wrong. In a neighbourhood
built in the nineteenth century, before the car was even invented, let alone in
widespread use, car use should not have priority and must be managed so more
journeys on foot and bike can be prioritised.

There is clear evidence from the views gathered during LN engagement that local
people want streets that are safer, have less traffic, slower vehicle speeds, encourage
cleaner air and make walking and cycling safer and easier. The Liveable Neighbourhood
proposals will help deliver all of these ambitions. No plan is ever perfect, and I support
further co-community planning to refine the proposed scheme, but the fundamental
aims of stopping through motor traffic are good. Genuine concerns - particularly from
those who are mobility impaired and rely on their cars should be addressed - and can
be with refinements to the scheme. Those who simply oppose any restrictions against
cars have loud voices, but they do not reflect the views of the quiet majority who want
safer, quieter more liveable streets. Please support the Liveable Neighbourhood plans
for Southville. Say yes to measures that help make our neighbourhood safer, cleaner
and better for everyone.
Statement 15 – Melanie Osborne

People, including me, have inertia about change, thinking things will be much more
difficult than they actually will be.
I have lived in Southville since you could rent a film on VHS from North Street. I drive a
car but predominantly cycle and walk.
difficult than they are.
I have a full time job, am a single parent (not my choice!) with three kids
I fully support the South Bristol Livable Neighbourhood scheme.
This area would be vastly improved if priority were given to walking and cycling. I've
seen a few notices in windows saying this is already a low traffic neighborhood. I'm not
sure if the people who display these have tried to walk their kids to school, go to the
shops on their bike or cross the road? I have done all of these things regularly and this is
most definitely not a walking or cycling friendly postcode. The tragic death of Alan
Hydes on North Street a few weeks ago lays bare the inequality between people in cars
and those not protected by more than a tonne of metal. Cars and vans drive
unimpeded, their drivers protected in a 1500kg metal box with many safety features.
Pedestrians and cyclists do not have any of the convenience, safety or comfort that car
drivers have and this should be mitigated by the SBLN.
These streets were built before the car was invented and this inequality where the car is
king has crept up on us.
I propose that there SBLN be extended to include a segregated cycle lane the length of
North Street. This could be done by removing the parking bays. More zebra crossings on
North street especially at Toll House Junction, Raleigh road and Greenway bush lane
would also benefit many children and families going to school or shopping on North
street. This seems a great opportunity to also outlaw pavement parking, recent
government legislation finally allows local authorities to do this.

Like all schemes, consultations must ensure people with disabilities are not further
disadvantaged.

There are some loud voices protesting against this scheme however a large percentage
of people living in BS3 do not have a car. Many more would choose to walk and cycle,
especially with children, if it were safer and more convenient.The SBLN would give
priority to those who do not have the safety, comfort and convenience of a motor
vehicle.

Statement 16 – Tricia Woodhead

Bristol AIrport expansion means this year some 10million passengers are scheduled to
use the airport and this is expected to rise to 12 million within five years This already
causes very significant tailbacks on the A38 and local roads on a regular basis
especially in the summer. Night flights mean the roads and sky’s are hardly ever quiet
with landings through to 3am and takeoffs from 6am daily. All this causes noise
disturbance as well as traffic jams.Using the ‘proposed transit system’ to support
airport expansion further in advance of the said transit system's completion will create
regular gridlock with significant impacts on local economies never mind road and
airport users. Any further airport expansion planning application should only be
considered once a functioning transit system is in place and has provided transport
capacity in addition to the current A38 corridor roadway.

Yours faithfully and in the spirit of our shared commitment to democracy I ask you to
consider the wider impacts of your discussions and decisions on residents and
businesses between Bristol City boundary and Bristol Airport.

Statement 17 – Maureen Hutchison

It seems farcical for Bristol airport to apply for planning permission for an extra 3
milllion passengers per year before they have completed the mass transport scheme
which they are applying for (for which no details of the proposed route and costings
have been given) , as this work will take years to complete even if funding can be found
and it is feasible.In any case in view of the increase in fuel prices air due to the Middle
East war air travel is likely to decrease rather than increase

Statement 18 – Ozzy Osborne

Living & trying to run a farm here 1 mile from the airport and under the flight path has
become impossible.
My bees are dying out as fast as I restock the hives, the kerosine fallout is killing them.
My Christmas trees are peppered with brown spots and are unsaleable.
Rainbow patterns are visible in the puddles and ponds from the same kerosine fallout.
Every aspect of life is compromised in this now industrialized area of designated area of
outstanding beauty.
And now they are planning to compulsory purchase our Common at Felton so that
[redacted by Democratic Services] can make/take more money out of our country...
Over what is already being taken out by tourists foreign holidays, ie £44 billion / yr.
Just madness.

Statement 19 – Mike Ephgrave

The only reason to implement a mass transit scheme appears to be to benefit Bristol
Airport and allow the increase of passenger numbers. A perfectly good and accessible
airport is Cardiff airport. If the activity of Bristol airport is curtailed the need for a MASS
transit would be reduced requiring only a good localised transportation system
benefiting the people of the west of England and not some distant vulture capitalists in
Australia. This isn’t about being Green it’s about Greed.
Statement 20 – Haydn Gill

Support for safer streets in Barton Hill and South Bristol

You'll be well aware of the benefits and objective of the East Bristol Liveable
neighbourhood. Safer, quieter streets. Cleaner air, alongside providing more options for
travelling by bus, walking, cycling or scooting. An improvement in health, where people
travel under their own steam within the neighbourhood. Saving money from higher fuel
prices too. The scheme has met its objectives, so should, in any reasonable
democracy, remain and become permanent.
When making decisions on the funding of the permanent scheme, and the South Bristol
scheme, don't throw it all away for the sake of a few people who don't care about the
health and wellbeing of their neighbours. Hold your nerve, and support a better
transport situation than the status quo, otherwise what is the point of you being elected
as WECA mayor, if you just keep things the way they are?

Statement 21 – Nigel Bailey

Until the access infrastructure is significantly improved, any expansion of Bristol Airport
is not feasible. The current transport links, including road capacity and public transport
options, are already under considerable strain and are insufficient to support increased
passenger numbers. Expanding the airport without first addressing these limitations
would likely lead to worsening congestion, environmental impacts, and reduced
accessibility. Therefore, infrastructure improvements must be a prerequisite to any
future development.

The short Bus lanes already installed and the ones being built this summer actually
slow Airport Buses down due to the fact they get caught in the tail backs of car traffic.
as locals we see this on a daily basis

Statement 22 – Nicola Bailey

Until the access infrastructure is significantly improved, any expansion of Bristol Airport
is not feasible. The current transport links, including road capacity and public transport
options, are already under considerable strain and are insufficient to support increased
passenger numbers. In particular, there is a clear need for a comprehensive mass
transit scheme to provide reliable, high-capacity access to the airport and reduce
dependence on private car travel. Expanding the airport without first addressing these
limitations would likely lead to worsening congestion, environmental impacts, and
reduced accessibility. Therefore, substantial infrastructure upgrades, including the
delivery of an effective mass transit solution, must be a prerequisite to any future
development.
Statement 23 – Zoe Mack

Bristol City Council held a consultation with South Bristol with clear results - to slow
traffic on North Street and Coronation Rd and improve parking.

A wholly unworkable plan was then submitted which not only ignored the consultation
results but would actually make the situation on both key issues worse.

The Council then asked the community to feedback on this scheme. Unsurprisingly
there were 18,000 responses which they then spend thousands of tax payers money
sifting through. A small control group might have quickly informed this council that the
design was flawed in many ways rather than needing to hear that from everyone in the
community (presumably the same people multiple times as no controls over this were
in place).

Now we understand that a new design will be done based on all this feedback and this
will be fully worked into a Business Case to be voted on and then submitted to
yourselves (Weca). Given the public weren’t listened to when we were first asked what
we wanted it seems unlikely that the council will be listening to us now. Constantly
asking but not listening to what is being said is wholly undemocratic and not within the
guidelines set out by the Liveable Neighbourhood scheme’s manual.

The result of the way BCC has conducted things has eroded public trust. We have
watched with shock the way the scheme was forced on the residents of East
Bristol. Billed as being a ‘trial’ but implemented in the middle of the night with
permanent planters and no budget to remove them. In fact more money had to be
voted through to make urgent changes (meeting of 5th Feb 2026).

As much as Cllr Ed Plowden wants EBLN to be a success the fact is that traffic has just
moved from one road to another. So some roads less polluted and others more. Is that
really worth spending millions on? (Council meeting 5th Feb 2026, [the] [name
redacted by Democratic Services] Strategic City Transport Service Manager at Bristol
City Council “So far the data from the changes to EBLN show improvements across
the EBLN area. Some boundary areas improved and then other boundary areas got
worse, but we don’t have 12 months of data.” He says ‘improvements’ but the data
doesn’t say that.

As Weca has the power to stop this farce we implore you, stop these schemes now. As
data from the traffic monitoring in Southville is slow to materialise we ask that you visit
Southville during different times of the day. It’s a lovely area with a large amount of
active travel. None of the reported rat running. Please don’t throw money away on a
scheme that isn’t needed and will cause pollution, road rage and impact poorly on local
businesses, as it is already doing in East Bristol.
Statement 24 – Denise Poole

Being extremely worried about the intended airport expansion I suggest that the
scheme needs to be completed before the airports proposed expansion to 3 million
extra passengers is even considered.

Statement 25 – Richard Frost

There should be no further ideas for airport expansion until there are firm and agreed
plans for a Bristol Mass Transit System.
Why has nobody supported an idea to connect the Airport to the M5 at Clevedon ?

Statement 26 – Geraint Dewi

I’d like to submit a short statement in support of the South Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood (Southville).

I feel moved to write this to counter the negativity of the anti mob. if they had their way
nothing would change, Southville/Bedminster would continue becoming more and
more clogged with cars and it would continue to become more and more unpleasant
and dangerous for our kids and population to live in and move around.

Something has to change and the liveable neighbourhood is a worthy attempt at
improving things. Not perfect, and financially constrained, but a huge improvement on
doing northing.

This isn’t a lifestyle thing. it’s much more serious than that. The recent death of a
cyclist of North st, killed by a car driver, is only the most extreme manifestation of the
rubbish everyday conditions that non-drivers have to put up with every day.

It’d be much easier for the council to do nothing. They’d save some money and not have
to put up with loads of grief and hassle. But they have a duty to do this - there’s no
choice, something has to be done.

This is an inner city neighbourhood, very close to the city centre, where walking, cycling,
scooting and public transport should be the way that most people get around.

Instead, what we have are streets full of parked cars (including illegally parked vehicles
on street corners blocking dropped kerbs etc), and traffic everywhere (much of it
ignoring 20mph), making for a very unfriendly environment for anyone not in their car.

We’ve become so used to this being the status quo that most people don’t give it a
second thought (I can only imagine that’s where the ‘anti’ people are coming from).

The South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood (Southville) represents an opportunity to
redress some of these imbalances. We need safer, quieter streets so that our kids can
walk to school and play. Safe routes to work so that people actually want to walk and
cycle.

The SBLN isn’t a nice to have for the middle classes. There are serious issues at stake
here: child and adult safety; our physical and mental health.

Statement 27 – Liz Newton

We continue to be concerned that Bristol City Council isn’t listening to the residents of
Southville regarding the proposed South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood. We are
worried that any kind of road blocks in our area will cause enormous damage to a
wonderful community. As you walk around Southville there is barely any traffic, with the
exception of North Street and Coronation Roads (our “connector” roads). These
connector roads that have schools and many businesses on that the traffic levels will
not decrease on if a LTN is introduced. During commuting hours across the whole of
Southville we have plenty of pedestrians, scooters and cyclists, as we are a community
that is very close to the city centre that already is very active.
Our petition now stands at 3,198 against the scheme. Nearly 100 of us marched to the
city council on a wet Thursday afternoon to let the council know our opposition to the
scheme (imagine the numbers if those who work full time could have joined). Every
month residents write to the council telling them time and again this won’t work, but
still the council persists.
We have now conducted a survey of all the businesses on North Street and will
continue to survey other businesses in the area. The results are
overwhelming. Currently 92% are opposed. These are signed surveys. Among other
things there is concern the impact this scheme will have on their business, not only
customers but staff access to the area and deliveries.
The government website on Liveable Neighbourhoods states that “Everyone should
feel they have been listened to, and authorities should seek evidence of strong local
understanding of, and support for, proposed changes. Local authorities should not
impose schemes in the face of strong local opposition that is clearly representative of
the views of the community.” When the 2025 consultation results have been analysed,
we encourage you to read the huge number of comments from our community,
expressing their strong opposition to this scheme. If it went ahead we will definitely not
feel listened to.
Our council isn’t listening but we implore WECA to listen to us.

Statement 28 – Charlie Siret

For many months, we have asked the Mayor when she will initiate a franchising
assessment. We have been dismissed with the response that WECA is waiting for the
upcoming Bus report to see what infrastructure would be best for the West of England.
Despite this, the Mayor has recently spoken to the Bristol Post to say that franchising is
not possible for a few years yet.

Her justification was that franchising would be too expensive for WECA and therefore
for the residents of the West of England, via a precept. However, this does not reflect
what we’ve heard from people in the West of England, and experienced first-hand.

We have spoken to people who are losing sleep over potential changes to their bus
services. Having no sleep impacts their work, their education, their stress, and their
physical health. Residents are considering uprooting their entire lives by moving to
other areas, within and outside of the West of England, to get access to a reliable bus
service.

People - in both rural and urban areas - are missing work, job interviews, and Universal
Credit appointments due to unreliable and delayed buses. Worse still, some people
can’t reach the jobs they want and are perfectly qualified for because the job happens
to be located on one of many poor bus routes. One person we spoke to missed his
Universal Credit appointment due to his bus being 10 minutes late; he was sanctioned
until his next in-person appointment, which wasn’t available for an entire month and he
lost out on over £300. Understandably, he experienced a severe spike in his anxiety and
depression, which further prevented him from searching for jobs - forced into risking
another sanction.

We speak to people missing health appointments and skipping out on early care. They
miss more work in the long-term by getting sicker, and in the meantime they avoid
travelling as the infrastructure doesn’t support their needs, like not having open,
accessible toilets at bus stations.

This isn’t to speak of the broader economic inequalities that are deepened by lack of
access to decent public transport. As a youth worker, many of my colleagues cannot
get to rural areas to deliver sessions and are re-allocated as a result. The provision of
sorely needed services are therefore determined based on public transport routes,
rather than the skills of workers or the needs of young people. Young people living on
worse routes - who by nature already suffer from limited access to support elsewhere -
receive inconsistent and unreliable youth work provision in their area too, furthering
inequalities for the most vulnerable young people. Patterns of inequality like these are
why recent research from the University of Bristol - Transport Justice in Bristol, Badru -
argues that “the silent cost of [Bristol’s] selective transport system is already being paid
by those least able to bear it.”

The Mayor said that WECA hasn’t proven itself worthy of such an increase in council
tax. There is no better way for WECA to prove its worth than to fix the single biggest life-
limiting factor for residents of the West of England, than to take control of and radically
change the bus infrastructure to work as we need it to. From our experiences speaking
with residents, poor public transport is costing us far, far more than whatever council
tax increase would fund franchising; I and many, many others would gladly pay a
reasonable precept if it meant we got bus services we could rely on.

Statement 29 – Judith Worthington

Statement against the proposed creation of a liveable neighbourhood in South Bristol
as it is not inclusive of the existing population.
A truly liveable neighbourhood is one that places people at its centre. Currently in
Southville and indeed in Bristol, as a whole, only the importance of clean air, safe
streets, and opportunities for children to move freely and play outdoors is highlighted.
While these are acknowledged as important components of a healthy urban
environment, for a neighbourhood to be genuinely inclusive and functional, it must
acknowledge and accommodate the full diversity of those who use it every day. Bristol
City Council is not doing this focusing only on children and cyclists.
Groups that are not considered include but are not confined to, single women and girls
walking alone at night, for example, experience public space differently from others,
poorly lit roads that are quiet and devoid of through traffic can create anxiety and
therefore restrict walking and participation in daily life (going out at night). Designing
neighbourhoods with well‑connected transport options, good lighting would a profound
difference to their sense of safety and freedom. Currently Southville is served by single
and infrequent bus route on the periphery in North Street. Similarly, older adults and
people with disabilities also require thoughtful consideration. Smooth pavements,
dropped kerbs, frequent resting points, accessible crossings, and reliable transport
links enable them to participate fully in community life. A liveable neighbourhood is one
where mobility needs are met without requiring extraordinary effort. This is not being
addressed anywhere indeed we are frequently informed there is no provision to improve
pavements and therefore the walking experience for those with reduced mobility. Those
employed in the local area of Southville such as carers, cleaners, tradespeople, and
delivery drivers—depend on neighbourhood that functions. Tradespeople, builders,
plumbers, and electricians must often transport heavy tools or equipment, so loading
points, parking provisions, and clear access routes are critical. This also is not being
considered in the proposals for Southville. Nor are the needs and views of local
business most of whom are not in favour of these proposals. Delivery drivers require
safe stopping points and streets that allow movement without unnecessary delays or
hazards as do emergency and supportive services. These requirements, are not being
met by the requirement for barriers to prevent free movement between the zones the
council wish to create, overlooking practical requirements of residents. Planning that
overlooks these practical realities risks creating areas that are pleasant only for a
narrow group failing to meet the needs of the majority and keep local life running.
Ultimately, a liveable neighbourhoods must balance environmental priorities with the
social and practical needs of all who live or work within it. Only by recognising the full
spectrum of users can places that are genuinely safe, inclusive, and vibrant. For all the
reasons above I am opposed to the current plans.
Statement 30 – Jennifer Platt

My statement is as per the below email on the chain, with the emphasis on that this was
sent to all of the below contacts and I received 1 response and the response was “have
you made a formal complaint?” [contacts removed by Democratic Services]
The council and Weca’s position seems to be “ignore it and it will go away”
You are playing with people’s lives, I want my life back, I want my neighbourhood back
and as a tax payer I would like the right to be able to use emergency services without
being blocked by a flower bed.
Your amendments to the scheme are just absolutely ridiculous. It needs to go and it
needs to go now before someone dies due to this scheme.
May I ask you to imagine you are in an ambulance with your loved one, your child, where
every minute counts and you get stuck behind a plant pot that doesn’t belong there….
Truly, imagine this, how would you feel?
Full complaint and statement below.
Do the right thing
Formal Complaint: Immediate Action Required

I am submitting this complaint because the current “liveable neighbourhood” scheme
is not only failing — it is actively endangering lives, damaging local businesses, and
making daily life in Barton Hill significantly worse. What is happening here is not an
inconvenience. It is a serious threat to public safety and community wellbeing.

1. Child’s Medical Emergency Was Delayed by This Scheme

Last week, my son woke up not breathing. We called an ambulance immediately. Whilst
in the ambulance, we became stuck on Cobden Street because a planter was blocking
the road. It took them five critical minutes to reverse and manoeuvre to turn the
ambulance around. Those minutes could have cost a life.

The paramedics told us they have already received fines for driving through bus gates
this week, and their sat-nav systems do not warn them about the planters. Emergency
services are being delayed, misdirected, and penalised because of this scheme. That is
completely unacceptable. No traffic experiment should ever obstruct an ambulance
responding to a child in respiratory distress. The fact that there have been complaints
about emergency services being delayed previously should have been enough to
remove this disgraceful scheme. You are playing with people’s lives and it is absolutely
unacceptable from a council that is supposed to work on behalf of the people. I am in
utter shock that this happened to me last week and I dread to think what could have
happened.
It was only a few months back that a fire engine could not reach a house that was on
fire. What is it going to take for you to see that this scheme is not liveable, it is literally
‘death in the neighbourhood’ and ‘death of the neighbourhood’.

2. Barton Hill Shops Are Being Crushed by Restricted Access

The scheme is strangling the local economy. The Barton Hill shops are losing
customers because people simply cannot reach them without navigating a maze of
diversions, blocked roads, and confusing restrictions. These businesses are the
backbone of the community, and this scheme is pushing them toward failure. Again, do
you even care?

3. Dangerous Traffic Displacement Onto Main Roads and School Routes

The rerouting of traffic onto Church Road and surrounding main routes has created
constant congestion and significantly increased danger. These roads are now
overloaded, polluted, and hazardous.

Even worse, the displaced traffic now flows directly past the two local schools.
Children are being exposed to higher pollution levels and more dangerous road
conditions every day. A scheme that claims to improve neighbourhood safety should
not be funnelling heavy traffic past school gates.

4. Daily Life Has Become Unmanageable

My commute to work now takes twice as long as it did before. The proposed change of
the location of the bus gate on Avonvale, helps half of the people but what about the
people who desperately want to turn right onto avonvale from Marsh Lane so that they
can get to their house? You are making simple journeys unnecessarily long and
stressful. It is my choice to drive, it is my choice to decide whether I want to do a
walkable journey in my car, it has nothing to do with you, so just stop playing with
people’s lives. The scheme is not improving quality of life — it is making everyday life
significantly harder for residents.

5. This Scheme Is Failing on Every Front

Instead of creating a “liveable neighbourhood,” this scheme has created:

• Delayed emergency response times

• Dangerous congestion on main roads

• Increased risk around schools

• Severe disruption to residents’ daily routines

• Economic harm to local shops
• A sense of isolation and entrapment among residents

• Isolated, quiet streets are not safe for women to walk alone – we want cars
passing by, it is scary when it is so quiet

This is not a liveable neighbourhood. It is a neighbourhood being placed under strain,
danger, and unnecessary hardship.

Remove the Scheme Completely

Given the clear and documented risks to life, the damage to local businesses, and the
severe disruption to residents, I am demanding the scheme be removed. Public safety
must come before experimental traffic planning. The current situation is untenable and
cannot be allowed to continue.

Statement 31 – Eddie Sovico Gallo

I am calling for the urgent removal of the WHOLE of the EBLN scheme in Bristol.
I have lived just outside the scheme boundary for many years without issue. Since its
introduction, however, there has been a clear and significant increase in congestion
directly outside my home, as well as along my daily walking route to the local school
attended by my young children. This is borderline criminal. How can you endorse a
scheme which has directly resulted in new congestion outside a school? Do you not
care about the children who attend or are you only interested in the children residing in
the handful of streets which have been closed off as a result of this extremely divisive
scheme?
You seemingly have no idea of the division and even aggression this has caused here at
ground level in the local area. It has had a damaging effect on community cohesion.
What was previously a settled and cooperative neighbourhood has become
increasingly divided and even acrimonious towards others. Myself and fellow residents
have witnessed (and/or read) antagonistic and troublesome behavior.
This is all on the administration which bulldozed ahead with this scheme despite clear
public majority opposition during consultation.
Concerns are being ignored. The local council have not learned and show no interest in
learning, they press ahead spending more money with further tweaks and efforts when
they should accept No means No.
This following a shamble of a survey which was so poorly questioned in order to try
avoid the real issue.
Shambles after shambles.
Statement 32 – Liz Read

I have lived in BS5 for thirty years and I moved here from a same-sized city in mainland
Europe.
I was horrified at the pollution here. I remember a photo of a big brown cloud on the
front page of the Bristol Post around the turn of the millennium. I bought the paper,
hoping it would be someone addressing the state of the pollution. It wasn't. It basically
said "Ooh, brown cloud!".
So, I was ready, really ready for someone to do something about the state of this city. I
was overjoyed when the EBLN was announced and it turned out I live in it.
I live off Beaufort Road. I can't tell you exactly where because the anti
campaigners have tried to threaten me. I'm elderly and live alone, but they know that.
Over the years I've seen several cars on their roofs first thing in the morning, and
countless dented wings and wing mirrors on the pavement. During lockdown I
encountered an angry motorist who wanted me to move off the pavement at the end of
a parking bay (where I was waiting patiently to cross the road), because he wanted to
park on that bit of pavement and I was in his way.
The first thing I noticed when the scheme was implemented was the silence in the
mornings. Since then I've noticed plenty of other good things. Little children cycling to
school. I was terrified to cycle when I first moved here from a city where I cycled every
day, but I'm also the generation of children who cycled everywhere, who went out to
play in the morning and weren't seen again until teatime. It's great to be able to restore
a little bit of that freedom to today's children, and it's vital for their development.
The wildlife's coming back too. I sat in the cemetery and noticed the songs of 10
different birds with my Merlin app, and it was lovely they weren't drowned out by the
traffic noise. I met a friend who lives in Glebe Road and she loves it now she can pull out
of her street without fearing a collision. She loves the quiet in the morning. No more
angry motorists, no more shouting and screaming. The cemetery workers say they like it
too.
Before the scheme was implemented I logged how long my journeys took. They are
taking about two minutes longer now. There were transitional issues with traffic on
Blackswarth Road, partly because of the traffic lights at the Fire Engine. This seems to
have passed now (as expected), though it always was a dreadful junction. At no stage
has traffic on the Church Road been as bad as it was before the Showcase Bus Route
(2003) and it's pretty much back to normal now as well, though normal ain't great.
There has always been a problem with insane parking at the bottom of Beaufort Road.
While I appreciate that people are free to educate their children as they wish, driving
them for miles and parking on footpaths and verges has never been a right. Likewise the
church. Canon Gregory says he's lost 100 of his congregation, but the church is as fully
accessible as the school, via Netham Rd, Grindell Rd and Pile Marsh. What they are
really complaining about is their increased difficulty in parking on Beaufort and
Avonvale Roads. Neither of these factors is a reason for getting rid or modifying the LN.
Statement 33 – Bex Martin

I have previously shared with you - many times - the serious and ongoing problems
caused by the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood. None of these issues have been
resolved. In fact, many have worsened.
At the very start of this scheme, residents were told by a local councillor that traffic
would "evaporate". We are still waiting for that miracle. It hasn’t evaporated. It has been
displaced - into longer routes, heavier congestion, and increased pollution. The
promise was misleading, and residents are living with the consequences every single
day.
I want to be clear: I only drive when I absolutely have to. But the enforced detours, the
loop-the-loops just to get in and out of my own neighbourhood, are absurd. They create
more traffic, more idling, more emissions, and more frustration. There is no
environmental logic to this. There is no common-sense logic to this.
The infrastructure itself presents an unacceptable risk to public safety. Emergency
services face delays. That is not speculation - it is fact. When you design a
neighbourhood with bottlenecks, single-entry points, and forced diversions, you create
danger. Residents feel trapped, anxious, and unheard.
There is now substantial evidence of the harm this scheme is causing to the very people
it claims to help. When will you start listening? When will you stop funding a scheme
that is actively making life worse?
Local businesses are suffering. Some have already gone under.

[examples redacted by Democratic Services]
These are not abstract economic trends. These are real businesses, real livelihoods,
real community assets being damaged by a scheme that was supposed to "improve"
the area.

St Patrick’s Church has reported a 30% reduction in worshippers, with people even
receiving fines when attending funerals. St Patrick’s School - once oversubscribed -
now has spaces available. That should alarm you. Families are being pushed away, not
supported.

Can you not see what is happening?

This scheme is not creating a liveable neighbourhood. It is creating an unlivable one.
Residents have been raising the alarm for years, and yet the concerns remain
dismissed, minimised, or ignored.

I am asking - again - for transparency, honesty, and meaningful engagement. Stop
treating residents as obstacles to be managed. Start treating us as partners whose lived
experience matters. Please stop funding and dismantle this abomination of a scheme.
Statement 34 – Jackie Head

Thank you for the recent opportunities you have given our group to speak with MCA
transport officers and Eurocoaches, (our new operators from the 99 and X91 from April)
and for the fact that 2 officers are coming to our Bus Engagement event in the Chew
Valley tomorrow. This encourages us to believe that you are sincere in your intentions to
continue to work with our local community and we trust the outcomes of the event will
allow you to have some rich data about community transport needs and wishes in our
area.

As you know our group takes a proactive and collaborative stance to working with the
MCA and we sincerely hope this can continue going forward. From April, we are in a
different relationship to the MCA and to operators but we think it would serve
everyone’s best interests to maintain some of the functions we have fulfilled thus far.

1. Communications and Community Engagement: Clearly we can continue to
engage with our community to encourage bus use through our local networks.
We would be greatly helped by a clear communications channel offered to us by
the MCA so that we can ensure we post out to our local networks in a timely
manner and assist the MCA in ways it can best connect with our local
community. Having access to a modest budget for public events would also be
extremely helpful.
2. Access to Management data: One of the ways in which our group has
supported bus services, the MCA and the community is through having access
to management data about our local bus routes, which we have analysed to
show trends in footfall and to reveal the problems of working with now obsolete
Ticketer machines; a fact that had not been picked up in any other way. We think
it would serve everyone’s best interests if once a month we could be sent the
day by day footfall on these routes for us to analyse and return to MCA and the
operators with useful analysis and graphs to aid the future running and
improvement of routes. Of course you will have access to this data within the
MCA, but might not have the time it takes to analyse it this closely: why not let us
continue to take the strain?
3. An opportunity to feed into route changes We would like a formal timetabled
meeting twice each year, where we can be consulted about any proposed
changes and also input our own proposals for any changes in the public
transport provision in the area. Having good connections into local communities
means we can be a useful source of information about what the community
wants and needs. We will also continue to carry out community surveys and this
data could help give a useful steer about changes which might optimise routes.
For example, a survey carried out in the area showed that a Saturday and
Saturday evening route for the X91 would prove popular and this an addition to
the timetable that has grown quickly since its introduction in September 2025.
4. A good working relationship with the new operators and the MCA officers
managing their work Under our present role we have a Memorandum of
Understanding between operators and ourselves which clarifies our roles and
responsibilities and holds a circle of trust and confidentiality which has proved
extremely helpful. It has enabled us to support and challenge the work of
operators and to hold embargoes as necessary, whilst being in the loop to
prepare our community for change. We would like to see a Memorandum of
Understanding in place between ourselves, the MCA and the operators to allow
certain aspects of this to continue, such as the holding of confidential material
in good time to enable us to prepare comms materials and community
engagement in a timely manner. We believe our group has earned the right to be
trusted in this way through the way we have conducted ourselves over the last 2
years of the WESTlocal scheme. We hope you agree.

We look forward to hearing from you further, to put things in place for the onward MCA
community engagement journey taking into account these points and are also open to
hearing your thoughts about other ways we can continue to serve the work of the MCA
and our community.

Statement 35 – Jo Sergeant

Mayor Godwin, your recently published Transport Vision includes some worthy
aspirations. However, we feel that it is nowhere near as ambitious as a vision for our
region could be. Aspects needing greater attention include:

• More focus on rail infrastructure expansion - for example, a commitment to
getting the Henbury Loop delivered.
• Radial bus routes, with potential to convert to tram routes.
• Transport hubs at Park & Rides, as well as other key interchanges, with safe
cycle storage, places for people to shower and change, toilets and refreshment
points for passengers, bus drivers and other transport staff.
• Frequent and reliable connecting shuttle services to the radial and mass transit
routes. Greater transport equity for the rural areas - many of which are described
as transport deserts.
• Commitments to improve alternatives to driving for businesses and their staff,
across the region, not just to support the expansion of the Airport and the new
Western Innovation Arc.
An integrated transport system with multi-modal ticketing would be a game-changer for
our region. However it would be far easier to implement if we had control of our bus
network, which WECA has the power to achieve through franchising.

Buses are going to be the main mode of public transport for most people for many years
to come, even with the strongest political will to achieve rail/tram-based mass transit.

My colleague, [name redacted by Democratic Services] has eloquently explained the
benefits of taking up your precepting powers to significantly improve bus services
across the region, particularly for those on the lowest incomes.
Additionally, in the light of the Chancellor’s recent announcements about fiscal
devolution, you, yourself, have welcomed the opportunity for WECA to improve public
transport from the proceeds of an overnight visitor levy, as well from an agreed share of
national taxation.

Furthermore, your friend, Andy Burnham, has publicly stated that WECA needs to take
greater control of its buses. And, whilst you have pointed out that our region is
proportionately more rural than Greater Manchester and may need different solutions,
we would argue that a franchising model is far more likely to meet the needs of our rural
communities than the current enhanced partnership arrangement is doing.

The enhanced partnership arrangement has not delivered a decent bus service to date
and it has not been made clear what more could be done to improve it. We remain
sceptical about what more could be done to improve it and have yet to be provided any
evidence suggesting otherwise.

Statement 36 – Matt Sanders

South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood: The Fundamental Lie

PLEASE NOTE:
This Statement is about a false claim published on the website of Bristol City
Council. So a link is provided, for readers to see the relevant page, and understand the
following points. Further links are provided, to maps and spreadsheets on BCC web-
pages, to illustrate the other points that are made.
Please DO NOT remove those links, as that would fundamentally compromise the
Statement.
The published Constitution states NO requirement to remove links, so there is no
legitimate reason to do so. (I’m informed that procedure rules may soon be re-drafted,
but they will not be ratified until June, so the existing published rules should be
applied.)
— SBLN MODAL FILTERS
Bristol City Council is currently developing details for the proposed South Bristol
Liveable Neighbourhood.
Funding from WECA is ONLY available for a liveable neighbourhood, if the proposals
include eliminating “through traffic”, by introducing modal filters.
And the proposal for Southville does indeed consist of dividing this area into four
“zones”, separated by modal filters, as show by plans on the BCC website, here:
[link redacted by Democratic Services]
— “TRAFFIC DATA SHOWS…”
The second paragraph on this Council webpage says:
“Traffic data show that high numbers of vehicles from outside the area use
residential streets in Southville as a cut-through to other destinations.”
This claim is being made in order to garner support from the public, and to justify the
proposed measures.
But WHAT specific “Traffic data” actually PROVES this claim…?

— THE 2024 TRAFFIC SURVEYS
The only way to demonstrate that vehicles are “cutting through” — rather than simply
driving to or from destinations within this locale — is to have numerous number-plate
recognition cameras throughout the streets of Southville, and (simultaneously) more
cameras on all the perimeter roads.
A MAP of SBLN Traffic Survey Sites can be viewed at this link:
[link redacted by Democratic Services]
This map shows about forty survey sites within the Southville zone. But they are mainly
ATC (Automated Traffic Counts) and JTC (Junction Turning Counts) — but not ANPR
(Automated Number Plate Recognition) cameras.
And these surveys only started at the end of November 2025, so cannot possibly be the
“Traffic data” referred to in the BCC website’s claim, which was written many months
ago.
The only ANPR cameras shown in this vicinity are one in Coronation Road, and one in
North Street, which collected data for two days in June 2024.
But just two cameras on the perimeter of the Southville zone could not possibly
demonstrate that “high numbers of vehicles” were indeed “cutting through” — when
there were NO cameras within Southville itself, to record them doing it.

— WHICH DATA IS RELEVANT…?
Whenever anybody asks WHAT specific “traffic data” supports the website’s claim,
they are directed to this page on the council’s website:
[link redacted by Democratic Services]
This has a link to download “Traffic Survey Results” from 2024, here:
[link redacted by Democratic Services]
And this consists of 94 complex spreadsheets, each with dozens of pages.
Yet, whenever we ask WHICH specific spreadsheet(s) support the Council’s claims
about “high numbers of vehicles” “cutting through” Southville, no answer is
forthcoming.
This is despite it being in the Council’s interest to sing any supporting data from the
rooftops, at every possible opportunity…

— THE ANPR REPORTS
Of the 94 spreadsheets relating to the 2024 traffic surveys, six of them contain ANPR
data, which was collected on 11th & 12th June 2024.
They have a link to this MAP of ANPR Camera locations:
[link redacted by Democratic Services]
This shows that, on those dates, there were 25 ANPR Cameras throughout South Bristol
— from Winterstoke Road in the west, to Bath Road in the east, and Coronation Road in
the north, to Parson Street in the south.
NONE of these ANPR cameras were WITHIN the SBLN’s “Southville Zone” — which is
bounded by Coronation Road to the north, and North Street to the south.
But TWO cameras were on Southville’s perimeter roads…

— RELEVANT CAMERA LOCATIONS
ANPR Camera 14 was on Coronation Road, near the junction with Cooperage Lane.
ANPR Camera 16 was on North Street, near the junction with Agate Street.
The purpose of these traffic surveys was to record which cars were seen by each
camera — and to then identify how many of those vehicles were subsequently seen by
other cameras — in order to deduce what routes they followed.
But even if certain vehicles were detected by BOTH Cameras 14 and 16 — on opposite
sides of the Southville zone — there is no way of knowing whether they “cut though” the
zone, or drove around its perimeter — as there were NO cameras WITHIN the Southville
zone, to record any “cutting through” which might have been happening.

— THE MOVEMENT MATRIX
In the zip folder, the first ANPR spreadsheet (for 11th June 2024) is:
ID-0524-0183 Bristol City Council Mini-Comp Jun24 - ANPR OD Report - 11_06_2024
And the “Summary” sheet has a “Movement Matrix”, to show how many vehicles were
recorded by multiple cameras, within 15-minutes of each other.
Camera 14 (Coronation Road) saw 1,028 vehicles which were also detected by other
cameras. Only 2 of these vehicles were recorded by Camera 16 (North Street). The vast
majority (924) related to Camera 1 (Clift House Road) — as those vehicles had
obviously driven along Coronation Road — ie along the NORTHERN PERIMETER of the
Southville zone. So NO “cutting through” to be seen, here.
Camera 16 (North Street) saw 1,400 vehicles which were also detected by other
cameras. Only 4 of them coincided with Camera 14 (Coronation Road), on the other
side of the Southville zone. But there is no way of knowing if they drove around the
perimeter, or “cut through” the middle. Again, the greatest overlap (629) was with
Camera 1 (Clift House Road) — as those vehicles had obviously driven along North
Street — ie the SOUTHERN PERIMETER of the Southville zone..

— NO SUPPORTING DATA
So the published “Traffic data” absolutely DOES NOT show that “high numbers of
vehicles” were “cutting through Southville.”
If anything, it shows the opposite — that most drivers are ALREADY using the MAIN
ROADS, around the perimeter.
But with THESE camera positions, the 2024 traffic studies could NEVER possibly prove
that claim — because there were NO cameras WITHIN the Southville zone.

— THE FALSE CLAIM
So, no — Bristol City Council has NO “TRAFFIC DATA”, to prove this claim on its
website:
“Traffic data show that high numbers of vehicles from outside the area use
residential streets in Southville as a cut-through to other destinations.”

Yet this FALSE claim is being used, to garner public support for the scheme.
And — based upon claims like this — at February’s Transport and Connectivity Policy
Committee, a slim 5:4 majority of Councillors were persuaded to approve a £1.32m
increase to the then-current allocation of £0.6m, for development of the SBLN Full
Business Case.
Both Councillors and the Public have been misled, by this FALSE CLAIM.

— THE FUNDAMENTAL LIE
WITHOUT coherent Traffic Data to demonstrate a high proportion of through traffic,
there is NO JUSTIFICATION for carving Southville into four zones, separated by modal
filters.
Rather than arising from a genuine issue of concern in this locale, the design has been
reverse-engineered, to “solve” a problem which does not really exist.
It is clear that the “modal filter” design has ONLY been created in order to access the
WECA funding package — which is only granted to projects which block roads to
through traffic.
So the entire SBLN scheme is proposed on the basis of this single, fundamental, bare-
faced LIE.

Statement 37 – Christina Biggs

Bristol Rail Campaign welcome the Mayoral Transport Vision and continue to urge
WECA to develop the business case for using tram-trains as a way to implement the
RapidWest vision, as in Cardiff and illustrated in the attached two figures.

As presented at previous Joint Committee meetings, we suggest that the first step
would be to extend Platform 1 at Bristol Temple Meads as a tram-train loop along
Baldwin Street, across Bristol Bridge, round Bristol Centre as far as Cabot Circus and
back via Temple Way. This would need to be discussed with the Temple Quarter
Masterplan currently under way.

The next step would be to implement a wider network in the four directions roughly
corresponding to the four Mass Transit corridors but using a combination of existing
greenway space such as Callington Road Link and existing roads such as the South
Bristol Link as outlined in the second of the two figures:

1. Temple Meads to Bath via A4, Hicks Gate and Keynsham Bypass;

2. Temple Meads to the Airport via Callington Road Link and South Bristol Link

3a. Temple Meads to Thornbury via the cycle path spur past the Wood Recycling Centre
as far as Lawrence Hill (diverting the Bristol to Bath Railway Path underneath the tram
route by taking it down onto the lower path behind Lawrence Hill Station as far as the
corner on Whitehall Road), up Whitehall Road as far as Cossham Hospital and down to
Tennis Court Road, crossing over the Bristol to Bath Railway path at the old
Mangotsfield station site and north to join the Westerleigh Oil Depot line; and/or

3b. Cabot Circus to Emersons Green via a de-motorwayed M32

4. Montpelier Station to Cribbs Causeway via a bus and tram gate on A38 at Gloucester
Road, diverting to Southmead and back onto the A38 at Aztec West.

[maps and diagrams supplied with the statement have been removed]
Statement 38 – Katie Sullivan

My statement is about the EBLN. As a resident within this area, I am calling upon the
WECA Mayor not to release any funding that would make the EBLN permanent, nor
allow the current suggested changes to the road layout and bus gates BCC are asking to
be made, but to demand the immediate complete removal of the EBLN in its entirety.

I have three reasons for my request.

My first reason lies within the data pack released by BCC as part of its data analysis of
the EBLN.

BCC councillors are on record claiming the data is showing the EBLN is a success. I
wish to refute that point of view.

There is a known issue regarding the Vavista traffic counters which BCC have used to
measure the traffic changes within the EBLN. The counters rely on cars entering and
clearing a measured box on the road at a certain speed. The car can only be counted
once it has completed this action. The problems arise as the traffic slows or comes to a
standstill. Because of the nature of the way the data is collected, the counter will show
zero traffic at times when the road is completely filled with traffic, but it is at a
standstill.

Anecdotally, and within reports collected by the Stop the EBLN group, there is a serious
problem on several roads within the EBLN where we now have standing traffic for the
majority of the day. Blackswarth Road, Church Road, being two of the main ones. On
Blackswarth Road immediately outside Saint Patrick’s School the counter data
indicates an 18% decrease in traffic. To anyone who lives and works or travels past
Saint Patrick’s School this is obviously erroneous as there is standing traffic outside the
school every day for much of the day. Indeed, if one looks at the counter 200m back
down the road at the junction with Crews Hole Road, there is a counter showing a 25%
INCREASE in traffic on the same road. That strongly suggests a clear problem with the
data. The significant difference is that by the time traffic reaches Saint Patrick’s School
it is usually at a standstill and queueing, leading to this major discrepancy in the
counter data.

The Vavista counter data is in general appalling. The counters are not placed helpfully.
There’s no information on which way each counter points. The way the results have
been laid out in the Excel spreadsheet has meant you cannot manipulate the data to
tease out where the problems are. The layout is fixed. The rows and columns are
labelled unclearly. The decisions they’ve made about what time frames to use are
random. The data is presented with all the times mixed up and with the counters not
even listed in chronological order. It is a completely unprofessional way to present data
as part of any study.

The information I found out about the counters is that the slower the traffic the more
inaccurate the data with the greatest inaccuracy being with the traffic at standstill. In
short if the traffic is not actually moving, the accuracy disappears. I don’t actually
believe you can rely on this data for any roads with a high probability of standing traffic.
Which means the data for Church Road, Blackswarth Road etc, the main points where
people are unhappy is where the data is most suspect.

The TomTom journey time data within the data pack is also revealing. It shows massive
increases in journey times, up to 80% longer, on the surrounding roads in the wider
area, and backs up the anecdotal evidence about Blackswarth Road, Crews Hole Road,
Troopers Hill, Hillside Road, and Saint Phillips Causeway now having serious issues
with standstill, backed up non-moving traffic at all times of the day. There could easily
be a situation where there are technically fewer cars going along Blackswarth Road, for
example, however those cars are experiencing a severe increase in journey time leading
to standing traffic outside the school, and creating unacceptable air pollution for the
students within.

They have collected no evidence about the Lawrence Hill Roundabout, which is a
shocking oversight considering the massive problems created there on a major
interchange sitting on the main boundary of the scheme.

Part of their report includes rationale about how they decided to discount all the
established historical traffic data from 2022. It is unhelpful that the EBLN trial was not
designed in such a way that historical traffic data could be used effectively.

They also declined to include any data from the Emergency services as they claimed
they had not received any. They have based their entire report on one week in October
in 2024 and the corresponding week in October in 2025. I believe basing any decision
about the EBLN on one weeks traffic data is irresponsible, considering the huge knock
on impact the scheme has had 1000s of Bristol residents.

The buses on the main east west route on Church Road show little change since the
implementation of the scheme, but the number 5 route right through the EBLN is
showing significant delays over 2024. (The number 16 bus cannot count as there’s no
2024 data.) But I think this is a major point. They have put bus gates in on a route that
has got SLOWER with the EBLNs installation. I believe it is illogical and unfair to put bus
gates and fines into an area supposedly to reduce traffic and improve public transport
services, and end up with a bus service that takes longer to travel through. The longer
times are likely caused by the traffic delays that now exist on the major routes around
and through the scheme.
If the argument is that the bus gates are necessary to prioritise the buses, then it is a
basic failure that the EBLN has made the internal bus route worse.

I think there’s an argument that putting bus gates in that cost a lot of money on routes
which have been slowed down by the very scheme that installed them is unreasonable.

The journey time data has been sourced from Tom Tom. It’s a retroactively applied
scraping of data to try to establish the effects of the EBLN. The design of the scheme
failed to establish any baseline data that is at all useful for the wider area.

There are real problems hidden within the data. However, the council have very
carefully chosen parameters to measure with which they succeed in their scheme
aims.

Many major issues thrown up by the EBLN have not been accounted for, anticipated or
measured for, and their report largely ignores these problems.

This leads to my second reason for the removal of the EBLN.

A PhD thesis recently released by Sara Melasecchi [hyperlink removed by Democratic
Services] highlights the significant Social injustices the EBLN has inflicted particularly
on the Barton Hill area of Bristol.

[Links removed by Democratic Services]

This is an astonishingly deep, highly academic and well researched PhD thesis on the
EBLN, its planning, implementation and unfair and unjust outcomes.

It’s a fairly damning indictment of BCC’s development and installation and has huge
implications for the proposed SBLN, as most of the same structural injustice issues are
being built into the design of the SBLN in exactly the same way.

It’s a huge piece of work, and took a few hours to read through and fully understand its
findings and implications. However, its findings are clear, unambiguous, and were given
a formal presentation to 18 members of BCC by Sara herself.

It unapologetically finds there is systemic injustice built into the structure of the EBLN
that causes the heaviest weight and burden to fall on those residents least able to
accommodate its demands, whether assessing cost, time, mobility, safety or
environmental responsibility.

It’s an overwhelming indictment of BCC and their failures to listen to, value or attempt
to mitigate the harms brought to parts of our community by the scheme. It also
highlights how little any input from the community had on the design and
implementation, with one council worker on record saying the outcome was ‘baked in’
prior to any community engagement.

This thesis should be considered required reading for anyone who has supported or
opposed this scheme online in the various groups for and against the EBLN, and for
anyone currently living, working or driving in or around the EBLN or the proposed SBLN.

My third reason for opposing and demanding the removal of the EB LN comes from the
council‘s own published data measuring quality of life for people living in Bristol. It
shows a shocking drop in reported quality of life for the disabled residents of East
Bristol.

In the report below, select for demographic group, and choose the very last one -
Disabled.

[Links removed by Democratic Services]

Look how badly BCC have fallen with regard to quality of life measures 2024 to 2025 in
East Bristol compared to rest of Bristol. It’s pretty shocking. Some of the mismatches of
lived life experience compared to the average population are terrible.

[Images removed by Democratic Services]

Many disabled people within the EBLN have protested from the very start that this
scheme seriously harms their quality of life, has reduced their support network, their
ability to travel freely without additional pain or costs or time, and has increased their
feelings of isolation and of having little value in today’s world.

Both within this quality of life survey results and the PhD thesis there is a huge amount
of evidence of the harms, injustices and inequalities the EBLN has inflicted on those
members of society, least able to bear the weight of such a poorly designed, narrowly
focused scheme.

BCC have started from the assumption that the environmental and climate change
aims they are striving to meet are inherently positive and necessary, and have used
those assumptions to attempt to force unilateral changes on an area of the city that is
diverse, complex and with multifaceted needs. They have aligned themselves with a
particular demographic living largely in the eastern part of the EBLN who are already
culturally and socially aligned with their wishes.

Residents who are relatively more affluent, more likely to be able to work from home,
more capable of active travel, younger, fitter, already owning various transport options
and with the financial resources to make full use of expensive public transport options,
largely are in support of the EBLN. Those residents in public housing are more likely to
be employed with shift work or zero hours contracts, who lack employer flexibility, lack
bike storage facilities or other transport options, more likely to be physically unable to
utilise active travel and more likely to be dependent on family and friends as a support
network have had their lives actively harmed by the EBLN. It is these residents, who
already faced far greater challenges to everyday life before the EBLN was ever thought
of, who are facing the largest burden through the implementation of this scheme.

In summary, the data that BCC has collected as evidence in support of the EBLN, is in
some parts of very poor quality, and collected by counters with known deficiencies, and
is contradicted by the TomTom journey time data.

The PhD quoted details the extreme inequalities inflicted by the EBLN on those least
able to support it, and the quality of life survey indicates that BCC has seen a severe
decrease in the quality of life reported by disabled residents of Bristol.

For these reasons, backed by the cited evidence, I strongly urge WECA to suspend any
further funding for the EBLN, and demand its immediate removal forthwith.

Statement 39 – Katie Ellis

I am writing to let you know what a difference the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood
(EBLN) has made to me and my family.

We have lived on Beaufort Road since December 2018. When we first moved in, my
children were just three years and nine months old. We are a one-car family, and I
choose not to drive.

Since 2018, I have travelled everywhere locally on foot with my children, from St George
Pre-School and the many nearby parks, to daily shopping trips, and walking them to &
from Summerhill Infant School. It wasn’t pleasant & often dangerous.

They are now 10 and 8, and we continue to walk them to and from Summerhill Academy
each day. It’s a totally different experience for them & us.

During lockdown, the calm and tranquillity on our road was, at times, breathtaking. The
backed-up traffic from as early as 6amdisappeared. However, speeding traffic
remained a serious concern. Cars would race past children scooting on the pavement,
and there were frequent instances of vehicles mounting the pavement on the cemetery
side of the road. It often felt safer to walk on the opposite side, using parked cars as a
barrier.

Suggestions to make the road one-way filled me with dread, as I believe this would only
encourage higher speeds, making the road even more dangerous.

The introduction of the EBLN has transformed our daily lives. We can now walk, cycle,
and scoot safely within our own neighbourhood. I walk, & since the scheme cycle, to
and from work in Old Market every day, something that feels much more pleasant and
secure than before.

While I would welcome significant improvements to the bus service, and believe this
should go hand in hand with schemes like the EBLN, I understand that such changes
take time.

I genuinely believe that my mental wellbeing, as well as that of my family and the wider
community, has improved because of the EBLN. The benefits extend beyond safety: air
quality has improved, wildlife has returned, and we can now open our front windows,
something that was previously not possible due to traffic.

I appreciate that some people oppose the scheme and that adjustments may be
needed in certain areas. However, my family and I would be truly devastated if the
scheme were to be scrapped or reversed, and we would strongly oppose any such
decision.

I hope the necessary support can be secured & voices heard to ensure this becomes a
truly successful Liveable Neighbourhood for all.

Statement 40 – Ellie Dowding

I write as a resident of Gilbert Road, I live on the border of the EBLN and travel through
the scheme area on a daily basis. I wholly support the long term implementation of the
scheme as a permanent measure.
I recognise there will be many lessons learned from the experience of this first of a kind
scheme in Bristol. I hope BCC will take forward these lessons into improved
approaches to community engagement and implementation on future schemes. I can
see no progressive path forward which does not boldly act to address Bristol's car
problem. How could the WECA defend a sustainable transport vision if it scrapped the
first and only liveable neighbourhood - with what political capital could there be any
route forward. The EBLN is one small step on a road requiring a thousand more steps.
We must go forwards from here, not backwards.
My support as a local resident is based upon;
- I now have a quiet way to cycle up to visit my friends in Kingswood and Bell Hill Road.
- The EBLN has started an important process of reorienting the priority of our civic
spaces, away from an assumption that private cars have a right to inhabit all our shared
space, towards local neighbourhoods which provide space for play, active travel and
leisure.
- Bristol cannot grow and flourish if there is not a curtailment of cars parking on
pavements and across junctions.
- London is twenty years ahead and it shows. I regularly visit and stay in London and it's
so quiet. London's streets are very easy to cycle and walk around. Bristol will lose out in
the race to attract people to come and live in this city region if it does not prioritise the
quality of our neighbourhoods and their liveability.
- The addition of the 16 bus is welcomed. However, I waited in the pouring rain near
temple meads for the 16 bus last night but it never arrived. It took me 50 mins to travel
1.5 miles back from Temple Meads to Redfield. Bristol's buses are a stain on this city.
Buses need to be brought back into public control.
Of course I also desperately wish to see -
- Bus route expansion and improved reliability. There must be a wide range of active
travel options accessible and affordable for all.
-Buses in public ownership.
- Widened pavements at junctions to slow cars and improve walkability.
- More on street bus hangers. This is holding lots of people back from getting a bike.
-More on street trees.
- More on street car rental options. I would like to get rid of my private car but the
nearest on street car rental is 0.4miles away, requiring me to walk under a dark
underpass. This is too far away to hire for short trips. I have sent repeated emails to co
wheels asking if they will be expanding their scheme, to no avail.
- Segregated cycle ways with solid barriers between cycle and car lanes.
- Permanent bus lanes not blocked by parked cars.
- Traffic wardens issuing fines to people who park on double yellow lines (where have all
the traffic wardens gone?).
- A residents parking zone in BS5
- A ban on pavement parking.
I hope for a day when Bristol is not blighted by it's transport problems. I hope for a day
when people with babies don't have to push prams in the middle of the road because
cars are parking on the pavement. I hope for a day when private car ownership is not an
expectation in urban areas, because there are a multitude of other attractive ways to
travel around the city.

Statement 41 – Lyndsey Melling

I live on Beaufort Road in St George, Bristol, and I wanted to write to tell you a bit about
what life has been like here before and after the liveable neighbourhood trial started.
Before, I'd regularly hear people screaming at each other from their cars as they
struggled to pass each other. There was a constant tension, if you heard someone
speeding past you would wait for the sound of a crash. Sometimes it happened, at least
five times outside my house whilst I was in, in the 10 years I've lived here. Once, I
watched as someone tried to run over another driver who'd got out of their car to argue
with them. When I watched kids being walked to school, I'd have my heart in my mouth
as I'd watch cars mounting the pavement at speed to get past each other. It was
intolerable and allowed to go on for far too long.
The last 18 months since the planters went in has been bliss in comparison. It's not just
that there's less traffic and it's quieter, but the cars that do pass are calmer and slower.
It's like the dial on the tension has been turned down. We can sleep with the window
open. In the mornings I hear children laughing and talking as they go to school, and so
many more people walking and cycling past. I can talk with my neighbours on the street
without having to raise my voice to be heard.
I want to thank WECA for making the money for the trial available, and I want to ask that
you fully support making the changes permanent when that decision comes. The idea
of going back to how things were is terrible, it would break my heart.

Statement 42 – Peter Brooks

I live on Avonvale Road in Redfield, which is the road most impacted by the bus gates in
the EBLN scheme.

The EBLN trial period has been transformational for my mental health - my partner and I
are sleeping better, feel much less stressed and feel comfortable walking and cycling
around Redfield and Barton Hill.

Before the trial started, our road was a rat run at commuting times, used as a cut
through for trade vehicles during the daytime and weekends, and a route for boy racers
at night. We struggled to sleep properly, as the noise of speeding cars woke us up most
nights. This has been stopped completely, and anti-social behavior in Netham Park at
night has reduced almost completely. Before the scheme, people would park cars and
play music loudly past midnight in the car park. I used to feel stressed in the morning
and evening with the sound of constant traffic, people beeping horns and shouting at
each other. I’ve now realised how much this impacted my mood and ability to
concentrate during the day, I feel like a fog has been lifted from me!

We now feel completely safe cycling and walking around Redfield and Barton Hill. The
streets around our house used to be the most dangerous parts of our cycles into town
or into work. Before the scheme, every week a driver would aggressively speed behind
me, beep or close pass. One van literally tried to run me off the road on Marsh Lane, I
had to stop quickly and jump on to the pavement. We used to be incredibly cautious
around corners, as drivers would often pull out without looking. Since the scheme
started, I have been cycling more, and I have not experienced any dangerous driving
within the EBLN area.

On a more technical note, we know that it is the bus gates specifically that have been
effective on Avonvale Road and Marsh Lane. When the planters had been installed, but
before the bus gates had been implemented, the traffic was as bad as before the
scheme. Removing the bus gates would mean a return to rat-running, and would make
having bus routes on the road unfeasible (they used to frequently get stuck when
drivers refused to give way).

We want to stay in this area long term and raise children here. If the scheme is made
permanent, I feel able to do this. Netham Park is the main green space for the area, and
the scheme has made it safe for families and dog walkers to cross Avonvale Road and
Marsh Lane to access the park. Before, it was challenging to cross and get to the park
and play area as the traffic was either heavy or high speed. If the scheme is not made
permanent, we will be looking to move to another part of Bristol, as I would not feel safe
having children here, and I could not live with a return to the stress and the danger
caused by rat-running drivers.

Statement 43 – Satyen Joshi

Most WECA policies are centred around growth ie creating jobs, and supporting
businesses to unlock the full economic potential within West of England. In other
words, increasing GDP by bolstering spending power, which then drives the purchase of
even more goods and services. and so the cycle (rightly or wrongly) continues.

On the other hand, there is a drive to achieve all of the above under the backdrop of net
Zero Carbon/Green energy policies which includes the highly controversial Low Traffic
Neighbourhood Schemes (eg EBLN/SBLN) that seek to restrict freedom of movement
for businesses and residents who are reliant on vehicles to drive growth. Granted there
is a vision for improved public transport and active travel, but the implementation and
delivery of this vision is complex, time-consuming and non-trivial, so can be ignored for
now from this equation.

The issue is thus: Noble as though each of the above policies may seem on its own,
when put together, they form somewhat of a paradox - each policy is in direct conflict
with the other and pursuing both will mean at least one will never be met.

WECA needs to take a holistic approach in examining both policies, and seeing where
the greater good to communities at large, can be fostered.

In my opinion, WECA needs to drop the cause for furthering Low Traffic
Neighbourhoods. Other parts of the country have seen such schemes getting cancelled
for the harm LTNs have caused to the environment through extra pollution via longer
trips (yes I know...the irony), extra traffic on boundary roads and the less than desirable
effects that residents have had to face on a daily basis, especially for the less privileged
and elderly population, who rely on a support network.
I understand Bristol City Council has recently acquired £2.4 million to 'complete' the
business case for EBLN and a further 1.32 million to do the same for SBLN, taking the
total SBLN expenditure to an eye watering £2.1 million. All this for a 'paper' report that
will give nine councillors the luxury of having a hour-long debate at a future Transport
and Connectivity Committee meeting. A quick sanity check would have shown that this
money could be better employed in creating the very improvements in public transport
that the Bristol public have been crying out for.

In summary, if WECA has the requisite powers, it should put a stop to the LTN business
cases being progressed in Bristol and retrieve the tax payers funds to put to better use
in public transport improvements. Like it or not, cars will always be required to serve a
purpose. (Try shifting 4 bags of gravel for a weekend DIY project on the back of a bike).
The unintended consequences arising from LTNs, that promotes the surreptitious cull
of cars indiscriminately are too severe and harmful to be taken lightly. A recent PhD
Thesis by Sara Melasecchi (link below) into the social impacts of the EBLN makes for
grim reading and if I was the Mayor, I would not want WECA's name to be associated
with an unnecessary, costly and divisive social LTN experiment. Thank you for
considering this statement.

(Link to PhD Thesis [by Sara Melasecchi on the EBLN] : [link removed by Democratic
Services]

I would encourage all members of the Joint WECA Committee to read at least the
Conclusions of this document, and reflect on the image at the end which summarises
the ethos of this study)

Statement 44 – Tony Jones

We have learned that Bristol Airport is about to submit a planning application for further
expansion.

If so, this planning application will be very problematic. None of the problems resulting
from Bristol Airport’s last expansion phase (which is still on-going) have been resolved.

Given that the majority of WECA council members, (Bristol and Bath and North East
Somerset) are against further expansion we believe that the WECA Mayor should call on
the airport to delay its expansion ambitions.

Call on the airport to WAIT until it has reached its current growth target of 12 million
passengers per annum, so we can all see if local roads and infrastructure can cope with
the increased traffic and parking requirements at this number.

Insist that the airport wait to expand again until proposals for a new mass transit
system come to fruition and are proven to improve the current situation.
AND - considering that North Somerset will be so very badly affected by flooding and
sea level rise due to climate change, this airport, in this location, should wait to expand

until lower emissions aircraft have been developed at scale.

Tony Jones on behalf of Bristol Airport Action Network (BAAN)

Statement 45 – Oliver Haslam

Since the EBLN was introduced, day-to-day life on Victoria Avenue feels noticeably
different - and better.

I've lived here for over 12 years and it used to be common to wake early to the sound of
cars speeding along the road, accelerating and then thudding over the speed bumps.
That morning noise has now entirely gone. The street is calmer, and that sense of calm
carries through the whole day. Traffic is lighter, vehicles move more slowly, and it finally
feels like a residential street rather than a cut-through.

The biggest difference, though, is what that means for children. There’s a real sense of
safety now. Kids are out more - walking, cycling, and being independent in a way that
didn’t feel possible before. Seeing children confidently cycling along the road is
probably the clearest sign of how much things have improved.

Just as importantly, the street still works as it should. Deliveries arrive, bins are
collected, and access hasn’t been an issue. Concerns about large vehicle access have,
in my experience, been greatly exaggerated.

There has been some opposition, but it’s worth remembering that people are far more
likely to speak up when they’re unhappy than when they’re content. Many of us who
value these changes are quieter - but we are here, and we see and appreciate the
benefits every day.

For my family, the EBLN hasn’t just changed traffic patterns - it’s changed how the
street feels to live on. It’s quieter, safer, and far more suited to the people who actually
live here.

I strongly oppose the suggested removal of planters on Victoria Avenue as this will
reintroduce Victoria Avenue as a viable alternative 'rat-run' for motorists wanting to
avoid rush hour congestion on Church Road. It's a backward step and and will undo
some of the excellent progress already made in making the street safer.

Recent statistics demonstrate how effective the scheme has been in reducing motor
traffic and increasing walking and cycling/scooting, and I hope WECA continues to fund
it and build on the benefits already achieved.
Statement 46 – Sofia Johnson

I have been a resident of Beaufort Road in St. George for the last 8 years. I’m writing
today to thank WECA for making the money for the EBLN trial available which has
dramatically improved the quality of my home life.
Since the trial has been implemented, I have had my first child - we’ve been practicing
walking on the pavements up and down Beaufort Road, stopping to listen to the birds
and watch squirrels in the cemetery, while waving the many cyclists going by. This
would never have been possible before the trial due to the aggressive driving and
speeding along the road and often along the pavements. My mother provides us with
childcare as I’ve gone back to work, she is a nervous driver who would previously never
drive to our house for fear of aggressive drivers on the road, now she can enjoy the area
as much as we do.
We have built so much more of a community in our area since the scheme has been in
place. I would genuinely be in fear of our safety should the road be re-opened for rat-
runners and be devastated by a return to the chaos we used to experience. Please
continue to support the scheme.
Thank you for reading.

Statement 47 – Robert Harakis

No Data Provided, for SBLN “Through Traffic”

The Council’s Website Claim

Proposals for the South Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood include dividing Southville into
four zones, separated by "modal filters". This will cause enormous disruption for
residents, utility services, emergency vehicles, taxis, tradesmen and delivery drivers,
and make most journeys longer.
Bristol City Council must therefore have a very good reason to justify this scheme.
The SBLN Proposals for Southville are outlined on the Council website, which makes
the following claim:
"Traffic data show that high numbers of vehicles from outside the area use
residential streets in Southville as a cut-through to other destinations.”

The December Transport Committee Meeting
At the 4th December Transport Committee, I asked officers to explain what data this
is, how it has been gathered, what the specific numbers are, and how the Council is
actually able to discern which vehicles are demonstrably “through traffic”…
The Officer Response included: “Baseline data has been and is being
collected…” and: “Monitoring of current movements is being undertaken at present…”
But the officers provided NO FACTS, and NO FIGURES, and NO EVIDENCE to back up
the website’s claim.

NO Traffic Data…?
Residents may suspect that certain individual vehicles are “through traffic”, but they
have no way of knowing if that is really the case. Many of those drivers may be visiting
addresses within Southville.
Certain councillors and officers may WANT there to be high levels of through traffic, to
justify the measures which they propose, in order to access WECA’s funding. But that
does not mean the hoped-for “traffic data” actually exists.
If any relevant statistics exist, then, as requested, they should have been quoted in this
Officer Response. And it is in the Council’s interest to bring such statistics to wider
public attention.
The fact that they did not do that, suggests that NO such “traffic data” exists.

The Freedom of Information Request
On 4th December, I submitted a Freedom of Information Request, for the specific
“traffic data” to which this web-page refers.
Despite taking eight weeks to reply, the Transport Engagement Team made no attempt
to address my specific requests, and instead fobbed me off with exactly the same
irrelevant text as the December Officer Response.
Instead of providing me with any specific “traffic data” which was relevant to my
enquiry, they directed me to a page of the Council website, which has a link to
download SBLN Traffic Survey Results from 2024, which contains 94 spreadsheets of
collected data.
But the FOI response made no attempt to inform me WHICH (if any) of these
documents was relevant to my enquiries.
If the Council DOES hold the claimed “traffic data”, then officers have contravened the
Freedom of Information Act, by failing to provide it.
And if it DOES NOT hold that information, then officers have written provable lies, on
the Southville web-page.

The January Full Council Meeting
For the 13th January Full Council, I submitted a public forum Statement on this
subject, outlining the failure to provide the requested data in December, and the then-
overdue FoI Response.
But my Statement was MYSTERIOUSLY OMITTED from the committee papers which
were published at lunchtime on 12th January.
I protested to the Democratic Services team, and the papers were re-published that
evening, along with eleven other Statements, which had also been omitted. So this
appeared to be a case of incompetent maladministration, rather than a deliberate
attempt to stifle my contribution.
However…

The February Transport Committee Meeting
I submitted Questions for the 5th February Transport Committee, criticising the
dismissive non-responses from the December meeting, and the use of identical
irrelevant text in the FOI Response.
But my 800-word Introduction/Preamble was MYSTERIOUSLY OMITTED from the
published papers, which only published the three short questions which followed. And
I was then fobbed off for a THIRD time, with exactly the same irrelevant waffle used in
the December Officer Response, and the January FOI Response.
In subsequent correspondence with the Transport Committee’s Secretary, she claimed
that the omission of my Preamble was an accidental admin error, and she re-published
the papers, with my Preamble reinstated. (But ignored my request that ALL
contributors and councillors who had been notified of the original publication, should
also be notified of this REVISED publication — so the revision went mostly un-noticed.)
I requested that, now that the preamble was reinstated, I should receive proper
responses from the officers — but NONE were forthcoming.

The March Full Council Meeting
As officers had now failed FOUR TIMES, to state WHICH “Traffic data” supported their
website claim, I resubmitted my questions for the 10th March Full Council.
But when the public forum papers were published, my questions were — yet again
— MYSTERIOUSLY OMITTED!
I was not notified of any reason for this, so queried it with BCC’s Democratic Services
team — who eventually claimed that they “had reason to believe” that I was not a real
person, who lived in Bristol! They requested that I provide a utility bill, to confirm my
address, which I duly did. They did not explain why they did not seek this confirmation
BEFORE rejecting my questions. But having received the utility bill, they promised to
seek answers to my questions…
The March Transport Committee Meeting
As officers had now failed FIVE TIMES, to state WHICH “Traffic data” supported their
website claim, I resubmitted my questions for the 19th March Transport Committee.

My FIRST QUESTION was:
“Which Traffic Surveys are relevant?”
“Please state (with hyperlinks to the relevant published documents)
exactly WHICH specific completed (not current) traffic surveys have demonstrated the
SBLN web-page’s claim that: "Traffic data show that high numbers of vehicles from
outside the area use residential streets in Southville as a cut-through to other
destinations.””
The published Officer Response was:
“Thank you for your question. As you reference in your question above (the hyperlink
you provided) you were provided with a link to the 2024 survey data that had been
captured. This data pack has a folder clearly labelled ANPR Surveys which include files
that contain the origin destination (OD) data that has been recorded by the ANPR
cameras. The file also provides links to maps to show where the count sites are. There
are 25 count sites across the SBLN area. ATC data and views from local residents also
inform the understanding of traffic movements through the area.
“This data requires some interpretation and this will be provided as part of the Full
Business Case along with further data releases in the coming weeks from counts
carried out in December 2025 that are more granular in detail.”

So, in this response, officers specifically claim that the published ANPR
Surveys DO include data which confirms “through traffic” in Southville. But as they
here confirm, the “25 count sites” in the 2024 survey were spread “across the SBLN
area”. NONE of them were actually within “Southville” — so they could not possibly
record evidence of vehicles “cutting through” that area.
The response refers to “views from local residents”. But any such views are
unsubstantiated hearsay, and absolutely NOT the “Traffic data” claimed on the website
— as no individual can possibly know whether a passing car is “cutting through”, or
going to a destination within the zone.
The response claims that “counts carried out in December 2025 are more granular in
detail” — which is a confirmation that the 2024 counts WERE NOT granular in
detail. But it is the 2024 counts, which are being used to confirm the website’s claims
about vehicles “cutting through” — and to justify the modal-filter design.
While the December 2025 survey has used a large number of sensors within the
Southville area, once again, NONE of them are ANPR cameras. So they are just
recording numbers of vehicles passing by, and not WHICH (and how many) specific
vehicles are using which specific routes — ie “cutting through”.
My SECOND QUESTION was:
“How was the Data compiled?”
“Please explain in layman’s terms exactly HOW and WHEN and WHERE the relevant
data was collected and compiled, and how the resultant spreadsheets should be
interpreted.
“DO NOT write generic waffle about the different types of traffic survey. Clearly explain
EXACTLY how evidence of “cutting through” has been obtained.”
The Officer Response was:
“Thank you for your question. Please see above, data is collected through ANPR
cameras, ATCs and junction turning counts as well as resident feedback and locations
for all of these are provided on the link above the survey link. All counts are dated and
locations provided on the spreadsheets as well as on the link referenced above.
“This data will be enhanced with more detailed data from December 2025 and released
in the next few weeks and will show more detail on traffic volumes and composition
through the SBLN area including Southville. The FBC will include analysis of the traffic
patterns and through traffic.”
Sure enough, this is just generic waffle, and DOES NOT explain how ANY of this data
demonstrates ANY quantity of “through traffic”.

The Late Officer Response for Full Council
On 23rd March, two weeks AFTER the 10th March Full Council meeting, the public
forum papers were re-published, with my questions now included. But they received
identical responses to those quoted above.
So, in the December, February and March Transport meetings, and the March Full
Council, and the FOI Request, and the correspondence with the Transport Secretary
after my Preamble went missing, I asked SIX TIMES what SPECIFIC “Traffic data”
supports the claims about high levels of “cutting through”.
On EVERY occasion, officers were UNABLE to provide an answer.
However, on 5th March I received the following “explanation”…

The FOI Revised Response
Having not received a satisfactory response to my Freedom of Information Request, I
requested an Internal Review, and the reviewing officer gave some revised responses.
One of my FOI Questions was:
“Please provide whatever data/information shows the total number of vehicles using
the various roads in the SBLN's 'Southville' zone each day (or other period of study), and
the percentage of those vehicles which can definitely be confirmed as 'through traffic',
as opposed to residential drivers, or legitimate visitors to addresses in this area.”
The Revised FOI Response was:
“The ANPR data can be used to see how many vehicles entered and exited Southville in
fifteen minute intervals, and how many of the entrances and exits were from the same
vehicle registration. From this data we can infer through traffic.”
The respondent provided a screenshot of a spreadsheet:
“The above screenshot captures data from an ANPR report provided in the above link
(document name ID – 0524 – 0183 Bristol City Council Mini-Comp Jun24 - ANPR OD
Report – 11.06.2024). The data shows that 67 vehicles entered the monitored zone and
74 exited between 6:00am and 6:14am on 11th June 2024. The ANPR cameras at the
entrance and exit points matched 65 of these plates to the same vehicle. From this, we
can infer that those vehicles can be classed as ‘through traffic’ as they only stayed in
the area for 14 minutes maximum.”

Misinterpretation
So this “interpretation” of the spreadsheet suggests that roughly half of all those
vehicles “can be classed as ‘through traffic’”.
But this interpretation is entirely — stupidly — WRONG!
Firstly, the respondent seems to think “the monitored zone” in 2024 was
“Southville”. But it was not. The “monitored zone” was the ENTIRE South Bristol area
— the north-western corner of which was Clift House Road.
And the respondent’s screenshot was from the camera data for Camera 01, on Clift
House Road.
In this 15-minute period, 67 vehicles drove past in an easterly direction, while 74 drove
past in a westerly direction. And of these 141 vehicles, 65 of them were also detected
by another camera.
The spreadsheet’s Origin-Destination chart shows that, of these 65 vehicles, 1 vehicle
was detected by Camera 7 (Bedminster Parade), 41 vehicles by Camera 7 (Coronation
Road, near Bedminster Roundabout), and the remaining 23 vehicles by Camera 14 (also
Coronation Road).
So all this data shows, is that a number of vehicles DROVE ALONG CORONATION
ROAD which is the northern border of the Southville zone. They didn’t even enter the
Southville zone, let alone “cut through” it.
And many of those vehicles will have been detected by BOTH cameras on Coronation
Road — so the 65 corresponding detections at Clift House Road will include many
vehicles which were counted TWICE!
So — far from suggesting that half of all vehicles detected at Clift House Road “can be
classed as ‘through traffic’” — ie driving “through” Southville — this data suggests
that NONE of them were!

Dishonesty or Incompetence?
So, is this respondent deliberately trying to GASLIGHT me, and blind me with science,
in the hope that I wouldn’t understand the spreadsheet’s true meaning…?
Or are they so incompetent, that they simply DON’T UNDERSTAND the data that they
have gathered…?
Neither possibility shows the Council in a good light.
If there really was “Traffic data” which was so compelling as to justify imposing grossly
disruptive modal filters across a large area like this, then it should be EASY to explain in
layman’s terms — and it should stand up to scrutiny.

CONCLUSIONS
On THREE occasions, officers “accidentally” failed to include my Questions and
Statement on this subject, in the public forum papers of Council meetings.
On SIX occasions, they failed to provide ANY explanation about WHICH SPECIFIC
DATA proves the website’s claim about “high numbers of vehicles” “cutting through”
Southville.
And on the ONE occasion that they TRIED to explain it, they completely misinterpreted
and misrepresented the spreadsheet’s numbers.

It really is very simple:
If the Council cannot state WHICH SPECIFIC DATA supports its claims — then that
data simply DOES NOT EXIST.

Statement 48 – James Bambury

I strongly urge the Combined Authority to support constituent councils in the
implementation of these area wide traffic management schemes. As a resident of the
SBLN wider area but not of the initial 3 sub zones whilst I'm supportive of the scheme,
I'm also concerned by the rate of progress and that any further measures appear to be
pushed beyond 2027 with no apparent funding.
The recently released West of England Transport Vision stresses the need for a network
of safe active travel routes. The evidence from other parts of the UK and internationally
is clear that filtering of side streets is a critical part of any walk, wheel and cycle
network and particularly in enabling short local trips to shops, schools and for leisure.
They can be deployed rapidly, are highly cost efficient and it is simply not possible to
create a safe coherent network without these schemes. The Combined Authority
should be supporting and accelerating the implementation of these schemes if it is to
meet the Walk, Wheel and Cycle elemention of its Transport Vision.

Statement 49 – Bianca Williams

I live on Victoria Avenue, and my youngest daughter goes to Redfield Educate Together
school at the top of the road.

I can't stress enough how brilliant the EBLN has been for our neighborhood. Before the
temporary measures were put in place, we faced heavy traffic rat running during the
morning rush hour, often with speeding despite enormous speed bumps - some drivers
would just speed up in-between them. All of this at exactly the time of day that this road
is a major thoroughfare for children walking and cycling to the school.

Now it is SO much quieter, the whole area is full of people walking and cycling in the
mornings instead of speeding cars. The cars which are present are almost all local
residents, who have more of a vested interest in driving safely in their own community.
It's improved our lives so much.

We are lucky enough to have a wonderful local group of friends, and we now feel so
much safer letting our children go out to each others houses in the local neighborhood
without adult supervision - in an age appropriate way of course. In the warmer months,
a gang of them go and play up by the school where the seating has been installed in the
pocket park area. This would never have been possible before. This sort of
independence for children has been lost in recent years, and i feel so grateful to be
seeing it coming back to our community. It would be a travesty for the scheme to be
withdrawn at this stage, I cannot see any reason that it should be.

Statement 50 – Leo Pitt

I am writing to express my strong support for the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood.
I have lived on Hedwick Street just off Beaufort Road in St George since 2013 and have
two children at local schools. The East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood (EBLN) has been
overwhelmingly positive for me and my family.
Before the introduction of the EBLN, the school run meant walking alongside a queue of
bumper-to-bumper traffic with idling engines heading westbound. And conversely,
outside of the school run, would frequently feature cars speeding in either direction at
well over the 20 mph limit. My children and I had to shout to hear each other over the
engines, and I was keenly aware of the exhaust fumes in the morning. Crossing Beaufort
Road felt hazardous, especially if attempted close to the junction with Blackswarth
Road, where traffic would come from several directions and often without signals. I
once saw a collision on this stretch of road and have often wondered how a serious
accident involving a child has not happened. There was no way I would let my kids cycle
on this road.
My regular commute to and from town by bike was manageable but close, fast passes
returning up Beaufort Road and tension with tailgating motorists on my route up
Victoria Avenue, were relatively frequent; something that I would automatically factor
into my commuting experience.
Since the scheme started, all of this has changed dramatically. Beaufort Road is quiet; I
can walk and talk normally with my children; the air feels cleaner. It ought not feel
outrageous to state that we are able to cross the road without feeling anxious.
Nonetheless, it's true to say that crossing Beaufort road now feels manageable - safe
even - though we still take care. When the mood takes them, I have been able to cycle
the route with my children, and I see far, far more families riding than before,
presumably for the same reasons.
As a cyclist, The nerve-wracking close passes on Beaufort Road and tension with
motorists on Victoria Avenue have ceased. My commute into the city by bike, through St
George and Barton Hill at least, now feels calm instead of stressful.
There have been some minor adjustments. At first it took slightly longer to run errands
by car because we had to use main roads instead of cutting through side streets, but we
have soon got used to it and I feel like journey times are now broadly in line with what
they were before. On-street parking was already tricky around my area at some times,
there was anti-social parking; and this remains the case; However, I have not seen
either of these get any worse since the scheme began.
Overall, the benefits far outweigh the minor, short-term, inconvenience.
I know some residents, particularly in Barton Hill, have complained. I cannot speak for
them. In my area the sentiment I hear is broadly supportive, though I appreciate I may
not see the whole picture. I hope, therefore, that any decision about the future of the
scheme is evidence-based and guided by sustainable, long-term goals. For me, the
EBLN has reclaimed my neighbourhood from the "stranglehold" of traffic and been
overwhelmingly positive.
If the measures, on Beaufort Road in particular, were removed or watered down it
would be deeply disappointing and frustrating for families like mine who have been
calling for action to be taken for years and are now - finally - experiencing the long
overdue benefit of them.
I strongly urge you to keep the scheme and refine it as necessary rather than abandon
it.

Statement 51 – Nicola McDonald

As a resident of Glebe Road St George, BS58JJ, I would like to share my experiences of
the EBLN.
The changes to our local area and especially Glebe Road have been very welcomed by
my family, 2 Adults and 2 teens.
I have lived on Glebe Road for over 18 years and the road is now a beautiful quiet and
calm oasis. Which is how I imagined this road and our surrounding roads were designed
to be. I walk daily as I work locally at Air Balloon Hill Primary School. The EBLN has also
made my commute/ walk to work calmer and safer. Previously walking via Beaufort
Road and The Avenue was stressful and I have witnessed several road accidents and
incidents of road rage. I also have narrowly missed being hit by cars and vans more
than once.
Beaufort Road was especially stressful navigating with my children when they were
toddlers. Cars would mount the pavement on a daily basis.
My partner cycles to work 5 days a week and has found the EBLN has made parts of that
daily cycle across Bristol to St Mary Redcliffe safer.
We as a family use the car 50% less and I personally have walked to appointments in
Barton Hill and beyond rather than Drive.
I would be extremely disappointed and sad if the changes that have been so positive to
our local area were reversed.
Beaufort Road should remain an area of calm I strongly believe that the stress from
traffic had a negative impact to visitors to the cemetery. The cemetery is visited daily by
people tending to graves or using it as a quiet space for reflection and walks . I feel that
now the calm has been restored it should stay that way.

The EBLN has also been a positive for local wildlife and knowing that our air is cleaner is
priceless.
It seems very unclear regarding the impact to emergency services. I have spoken to
several firefighters attending on different occasions and to the care-home on call-outs ,
they didn’t seem to think there was an issue with accessibility. It seems there is more
data for police and ambulance. I think public safety is very important and would
support any changes that would support this once data has been collected correctly.

I feel most people support the changes, I feel the minority have been louder in their
disagreement. Nearly all my neighbours are in support of keeping the EBLN. Therefore I
hope you take this into consideration for your continued support.

Statement 52 – Lindsey Garwood

I would like to tell you just how positive and incredible the EBLN has been for my
neighbourhood. The street I live on used to be a rat run, with people racing up and down
it, many never paying attention to the one way sign that they put in opposite our house. I
never felt safe enough to cycle along the street - until the EBLN came along. I feel a lot
more confident with my children cycling and walking on the street now too. The pocket
garden with the benches and plants outside the school is a really popular place for my
kids and our neighbours' kids to meet, play, scoot and cycle. It is wonderful for them to
be able to play outside, close to home. We also had a brilliant street party there last
summer, making use of the recently arrived Street furniture, and are planning another
one for this summer - this brought people together from all over the neighborhood,
whatever their beliefs and opinions, and was such a joy.
There has been a lot of bad press about the EBLN, which has been very disappointing
(but not surprising, with the kind of news stories and divisive accounts that are beloved
of the press) - especially as it has not taken into account the huge amount of people
that have had their lives changed for the better. A few of my neighbours have disabilities
which mean they can't drive, and they have felt, like I have, that finally thinking about
how a neighbourhood can be without putting cars and how they get around as the top
priority has been incredibly beneficial for their well-being.
Indeed, with so little bravery and forward-thinking coming from our leaders from around
the world at the moment, I was overjoyed to see that Labour, and then Labour and the
Greens, take the risk to go ahead with making the EBLN - because as well as this being
for the health and happiness of local people in the micro sense, it is part of a much
larger, macro, picture where we have to think about what we want from our cities. Is it
to be all about cars and where they can drive and park? And shall we just fill up our
roads and the streets where we live more and more? Or can we think about a better way
of living, for us and the planet? This is why I thought this was such a wonderful move,
and why I was proud to live in a city that supported and encouraged change.
And this is why I am very saddened and frustrated by the news that they are thinking of
allowing drivers to come on to Victoria Avenue and travel all the way along it again
(apart from the school section). The rat run will come back, the benefits will be lost, it
will be shying away from the needed change and just giving up.
We cannot decide our policies because of some people who shout loudly, many of
whom are being used by organisations that don't care about them but want to
dismantle anything that smacks of change and forward-thinking. We cannot draw back
because of some news stories (many with the same person, over and over again). We
cannot plan, and make big and weighty decisions, and then throw it all away before it
has had a chance to become normal and forgotten (and evidence from elsewhere,
including the nearby Dings, shows how things that have once been difficult for some to
accept become pleasing and accepted and it can't be imagined any other way!).
Please don't give up on the EBLN, please don't turn your backs on this positive change.
I, my family, my neighbours, and future generations need your commitment.

Statement 53 – Andrew Bridgewater

I'd like to add my support to the EBLN. We live on Worsley st, just off church road and
since the livable neighborhood came in our daughters walk to school round the corner
is much calmer.
We've also noticed an impact on traffic on our street, as people are no longer using it as
part of a rat run.
The lack of cars zooming up Victoria avenue means we're much happier with our kids
popping round to friends around there, and has made my travel by bike much easier.
Before the EBLN the number of people driving at inappropriate speeds down Vic avenue
made biking a real challenge.
I'm aware the traffic on church road remains bad at peak times but having lived in the
area for 13 years this really isn't a new problem!

Statement 54 – Rob Williams

I would like to put on record my support for BCC's EBLN. I am a resident within the
scheme, living on Victoria Avenue.
The reduction in traffic has had an extremely positive impact on both my and my
families quality of life. The street is now a nice place to be, opposed to the busy rat run
it was before the EBLN. In particular, the reduction in commercial traffic has been
great.
One of my children attends RET School at the top of Victoria Avenue, the traffic
reduction has also been great for the daily walk to and from school, and also for the
children during their break times.
As a regular cyclist, the reduced traffic flow have also been greatly appreciated. The risk
of been knocked down by aggressive rat run driving has been much reduced.

Statement 55 – Brendan Taylor

Public statement regarding bus service cuts in Stapleton, stakeholders in villages of
Frenchay, Stapleton and Eastville with NHS farm facilities Burden Neurological
hospital.
We are very concerned without any Public consultation that 50 bus service was
reduced from an hourly frequency to just 4 buses a day off .
We understand the west of England mayoral combined transport Authority and North
Somerset council bus grant was reduced from £57 million pounds to £51 million
pounds resulting in service reduction the Department for also made it clear that
Transport levy should raise in Bristol city centre, south Gloucestershire county council,
North Somerset council and Banes .
To the Network operating

But so far Bristol city council we told only asked for the 25 bus Bristol city centre to St
Paul's, St werburges Eastville park Fishponds Services to be kept running by Euro
coaches from the
4 th April 2026 to 26 th April 2026 .
As well as people being unable access disabled facilities.

Why did the west of England mayoral combined transport Authority and North Somerset
council bus planners not
Reroute Bus 25 From Bristol city centre Broadmead shopping centre, Haymaket St
Paul's st werburges Eastville Stapleton Bell Road to Fishponds Town centre and loop
back to Eastville

Other services on bus contractor are
Due to lack of funding from the Department for Transport Grant and transport levy.
Only from 4 th April to 26th July are
2026
X91 Bristol city centre ,Bristol Temple meads, Bedminster Parson street, Hartcliffe to
Chew valley.
99 Chew valley local service.
P1 Bristol to Winsford.
Keynsham Town service
K1
2v Bath spa Park and ride interchange Timsbury Paulton, midsomer Norton Westfield
Radstock,
Y8 Yate Park and ride site Yate railway station yate bus station chipping
Sodbury, Wickwar Charfield new Railway station Wotton under Edge, 40
For Stroud Merry Walk bus and coach station
Theses 2 services need linking
522 Bristol to Bath via Bristol Temple meads station, Arnos vale Bristlington keynsham
Timsbury Paulton, midsomer Norton Westfield Radstock Peasdown st john Bath spa
bus and coach station
Morning journeys evening journeys changed and Bristol Bus and coach station to
Harbourside Hotwells Ashton Gate to Clevedon Dial Hill
Other services have gone from 30 and 15 in Evenings and Sundays
To hourly on 41 42 43 44 45
With a new Depot opening at keynsham
Somerset
But we are very very concerned the passenger with reduced mobility wheelchairs users
and partly sighted passengers with Neurological diversity.
Who use the 50 to access the NHS facilities and in Stapleton Burden Neurological
hospital,
and school for Nursery school.

On the cancelled 61 Bristlington Town service to Bristol
Their was no alternative service discussion service 36 5 or 1 were dis by the Transport
Authority
With locial community and stakeholders and local councillors Tim Rippington,katja
,Hornchen Andrew Varney, joe Clark, or in Stapleton village councillors Alsayed Al -
maghrabj Green councillor or Louis martin Labour Party councillor
Yet the Department for Transport bus Act 2 2025 expect a access plan ,for passengers
with reduced mobility wheelchairs users,
Ask to school College university heath provision Hospitals basic food shopping leisure
facilities coach station Railway station.

We need theses bus cut discussion by the west of England mayoral combined transport
Authority on 23rd March 2026 and 27 th March 2026 .
The west locial cut come into play on 26 th July 2026
We need consultation with disabled passengers groups and on access to Railway
metro west railway at Bedminster Parson street Bristol Lawrence hill, Bristol Stapleton
road,
Nalisea and Backwell, weston super mare and Cheltenham spa.
6 more inter city cross country train Arriva 1sq capital service voyager train for the
Bristol Temple meads station to Plymouth North Road Manchester piccadilly Edinburgh
Waverley
Lumo Railway First Group plc service from carmarthen, Cardiff Central, Newport seven
Junction Bristol Parkway London Paddington.
Paignton to London Paddington via Weston super mare ,Bristol Temple meads station
Bath spa

The new First group plc Greater Western trains company limited GWR service from
Bristol Temple meads Bath spa, Swindon Oxford service.
We still need lifts at Bristol Parkway station, Weston super mare,Nalisea and Backwell
Parson street Bedminster
Bristol Lawrence hill, Bristol Stapleton road, Cheltenham spa
Brendon Taylor Disabled passengers advocate.

Statement 56 – David Redgewell

Public statement.
We are very concerned that their is no report on was 19th March 2026 .
Transport and connectivity committee of Bristol city council
Does not give a report on cuts to the city Region bus network for the 4th April 2025
Service 522,
Theses are the peak Hour journeys to Bristol bus and coach station and Bath spa bus
and coach station and links via from Paulton, Midsomer Norton westfield Radstock
Peasdown st john Bath Sulis RUH hospital
This means no locial peak Hour morning journeys into Bristol city centre from
Keynsham, Bristlington Arnos vale
Some morning journeys on Monday to Friday have been reinstated.

The 61 is being removed Bristlington Town service to Bristol city centre
But with no changes to the to1 , 36 or 5 to cover the st Anne's park,Brislington
Hungerford road knowle Hengrove hospital imperial park Hartcliffe Highridge service

The 5 could have been reroute with 36 around part of Bristlington Hungerford road,
As a replacement service
Service 50, Bristol city centre, St Paul's st werburges, Eastville Stapleton Frenchay,
Has lost it peak Hour services.
25 could have been rerouted via Blackberry Hill , Stapleton Bell Hill and Fishpond
shops
The Fishpond Road through Eastville has a 3 to 5 minute service.

The 42 Bristol city centre to North Common no longer serve St Bernard lovell school
X7 Bristol bus and coach station to Harbourside Hotwells Ashton Gate Nalisea
clevedon Dial Hill.
Is cancelled.
41, 42, 43, 44 ,45 have reduced frequency
Especially in Evening and Sundays
With the new First group plc at keynsham Depot after taking over Rapt Bath and London
Depots and looking at open top tour in Bristol.

Whilst we accept the Government's Department for Transport did not publish grant
details until 19 th December 2025
The west of England mayoral combined transport Authority and North Somerset council
Mayor Helen Goodwin with joint committee with a 6 million pounds less then £57 the
2025 2026 budget with a 3 year grant 2026 to 2029 of £51
Their is a need for more cz and transport Network money to go into public Transport
Network.

But the government needs an intergrated Transport report by 20 th March 2026 .
But their been no passenger consultation and West of England mayoral combined
transport Authority and North Somerset council,
Working with Bristol city council, Banes south Gloucestershire North Somerset
council,
Made service cuts including the removal of all westlink Demand responsive bus
services With in Bristol
So people in Bristlington will have no alternative westlink Demand responsive bus
services.

The service 25 ,Bristol city centre, Broadmead, Haymaket St Paul's st werburges
Eastville park Fishponds could have been rerouted via Stapleton village and Bell Hill
Given Stapleton village and Bell Hill a bus service.
As this tender is continuing untill 31st July 2026
Operated by Euro coaches.

The following service have been saved on a Temporary basis until the 26 th July 2026
X91 Bristol city centre, Bristol Temple meads station, south Bristol to the Chew valley.
Euro
99 Chew valley local service Euro
Keynsham Town service.
K1 ,Big lemon
2v Bath spa Park and ride site Timsbury Paulton, Midsomer Norton westfield Radstock.
EURO coaches
534 Filton college to Fishponds East Bristol Euro coaches
P 1 Bristol to Winsford is Euro coaches
Many early morning and Evening journeys have been altered.
Y 8 Yate Park and ride site Yate railway station Yate bus station chipping Sodbury
Wickwar Charfield Wotton under Edge for number 40 to Stroud Merry Walk bus and
coach
Euro coaches.
Which should be Tendered as a through service,
Between Stroud Merry Walk bus and coach station, Dursley may lane bus and coach
station, Wotton under Edge kingswood Charfield railway station Wickwar chipping
Sodbury, Hawkesbury Upton yate bus station Yate railway station yate Park and ride
site for North Bristol and Bristol. Y8 40 corridor.
But will now be re Tendered from July 2026.
It's is very important the we make progress with bus service improvement plan in the
west of England mayoral combined transport Authority and North Somerset council,
Bristol city Region.
Railway services
With it very limited city Regional Railway network although this will improved the
Bristol Temple meads station to Bedminster, Parson street Pill Portishead line and
Bristol Temple meads station to Bristol Lawrence hill Station, Bristol Stapleton road,
Ashley Down Filton Abbey wood, Filton North for the Arriva area and Henbury loopline
and Bristol Airport tram Train link line
Charfield for Wotton under Edge.
Tram Train route for south Bristol using
The North somerset railway
But we still need 6 extra cross country trains arriva 1sq capital service cross unit for
Bristol Temple Meads station to Plymouth North Road, Manchester piccadilly
Edinburgh Waverley via York
And accessible train unit metro west railway Network which are fully accessible on
Bristol Temple meads station to Filton Abbey station ,Bristol Parkway station Yate
Charfield for Wotton under Edge Cam and Dursley railway station Gloucester central
Cheltenham spa Ashchurch for Tewkesbury Worcester Shrub Hill Worcester Forgate.
Service operated by First group plc Greater Western trains company limited GWR.
With North Somerset council joining the West of England mayoral combined Authority
out for consultation we need to improve more Public Transport on the Exeter St Davids,
Cullompton, new station Tiverton Parkway, Wellington,new station Taunton,
Bridgwater, Highbridge and Burnham on sea station uphill weston super mare, Worle
Parkway weston Milton, Yatton for clevedon, Nalisea and Backwell Parson street
Bedminster ,Bristol Temple meads station to Bristol Lawrence hill Station,Bristol
Stapleton Road montpellier Redland Clifton Down station sea Mills Shirehampton
Portway park and ride interchange, Avonmouth Dock St Andrews Road and severn
Beach,
Investment in this metro west railway Network routes important especially with new
Electric Batteries plant and jobs at Bridgwater in new of Better public Transport with
Hinckley point c
New Electric bus links to Bridgwater and Weston super mare Raiway stations
We need a half hourly on Exeter St Davids to Bristol Temple meads station route
It's only half hourly
From Weston super mare to Avonmouth.
Station access at Bridgwater, weston super mare, Nalisea and Backwell Parson street,
Bristol Lawrence hill Bristol Stapleton Road, all need lift Bridges.
Including Stroud and Cheltenham spa
But discussion need to take place with lumo First Group about the Paignton Torquay,
Torre ,Newton Abbot, Teignmouth, Dawish, Dawish Warren Exeter St Davids station,
Tiverton Parkway Taunton Highbridge and Burnham on sea, Worle parkway Yatton for
clevedon Parson street Bristol Temple meads station, Bath spa London Paddington
proposals
And co op rail Bishop Lydeard Taunton Bridgwater Highbridge and Burnham on weston
super mare,
Taunton to castle cary, Bruton Frome,Westbury, Trowbridge, Melksham, Chippenham
Swindon service.
Also First group plc Greater Western trains company limited GWR
Service from Exeter Taunton to Bristol Temple meads station and Cardiff Central
becoming 30 minutes frequents
With Transport for Wales Bristol Temple meads station Bristol Lawrence hill, Bristol
Stapleton road,Ashley Down Filton Abbey, Patchway, Pilning seven Tunnel
junction, Llanwern Somerton
Magor and Undy Newport west and Cardiff Parkway Cardiff Central
2 hourly from 2027
At Present the may Timetable needs to agreeded with the office of road and Rail on the
Bristol, Temple meads Bath spa Chippenham and Swindon .
Hope the Railway staff can push this service with,Bristol, Banes Wiltshire and Swindon
borough Council, Oxfordshire county Council can push this so service can start on 15
th may 2026 .
First group plc Greater Western trains company limited GWR.

The Department has instructed all west country locial Transport Authority
To produce a sustainable Transport policy report by the 20 th March 2026
And to set up passengers forums
We again ask Bristol city Council, Banes south Gloucestershire county, North Somerset
council to push for a Transport Forum and talk to passengers stakeholders bussiness
and equlities groups about public Transport change
Bus coach Ferry and Rail services.

For west of England mayoral combined transport Authority mayor Helen Goodwin and
North Somerset council Swindon Borough Council, Wiltshire Council, Gloucestershire
county council, Somerset
To set a Regional Rail Executive simlair to the west Midlands combined Transport
Authority.

We must push ahead with North Somerset council joining the West of England mayoral
combined transport Authority and Gloucestershire County council ,in the future.
Is the view of GLOUCESTERSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL voted yesterday to
Join the west of England mayoral combined Authority in 2032 once the Unitary council
has been set up..

Statement 57 – Jo Fricker

I have lived on Beaufort Road in St George, Bristol for many years and I wanted to write
to tell you a bit about what life has been like here before and after the liveable
neighbourhood trial started.

Before the trail, our car has been written off twice, once being hit as a car speed down
Beaufort Road and then turned sharply onto Cossham Road and the second time as a
car speed up Beaufort Road hitting a a lamppost and the crashing into two cars writing
them both off. The said lamppost has been replaced many times due to crashes.

There was constant speeding vehicles; cars, motorbikes, vans travelling up and down
Beaufort Road as well as using the cemetery as a cut through. We know this to be true
as you heard cars revving their engines and slamming on brakes. This would happen
throughout the day and into the night and early hours of the morning.

Walking our children to their local
Primary school required a heightened awareness not only of road safety but also
shielding them from road rage. We could not safely allow them to wait outside their
home as we got ready to leave the house.

The last 18 months since the planters have been in has been bliss in comparison. It's
not just that there's less traffic and it's quieter, but the cars that do pass are calmer and
slower. There is a community feel around the streets. We can sleep with the window
open, feel more confident to let our children play outside their home at different times
throughout the day.

In the mornings children and their families walk confidently to the local schools; there
are more families walking up and down Beaufort Road and so many more people
walking and cycling past. I now let my 9 year walk ahead of us to school.

I want to thank WECA for making the money for the trial available, and I want to ask that
you fully support making the changes permanent when that decision comes.

The idea of going back to how things were is terrible, it would break my heart.

Statement 58 – Leila Meredith

The East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood has made a significant difference to the
neighbourhood, making it feel more safe, less car dominated and more community
centred. More pedestrian and cyclists feel safe using the roads, crossing Avonvale Road
to get to the Netham has become easier, children can play outside the Redfield
Educate School. There have been less instances of road rage, particularly on Avonvale
Road which used to feel like a rat run. I feel that the scheme has had a positive effect on
safety, sustainability and the sense of community in the area.
Statement 59 – Adam Cattle

I am writing to add my support for the East Bristol Liveable Neighbourhood (EBLN), and
to encourage all parties to continue with the project.
I live in Bristol and travel within the area of the EBLN, traveling through it by bicycle.
While many of the roads I travel along are narrow and unsuitable for cars to travel at
high speed, in the past, this has not stopped some motorists from attempting to drive at
high speed and without consideration for the safety of other road users.
Since the introduction of the traffic management measures of the EBLN, traffic danger
has been massively reduced, and roads which were always frightening to travel along
have become pleasant, encouraging more pedestrians and cycling.
Bristol has committed to move to 'Vision Zero' where there are no road fatalities, and
the introduction of Liveable Neighbourhoods is a vital part of that.
Please continue to implement and improve the EBLN.

Statement 60 – Rachel Newman

I am writing to urge that you make the EBLN permanent and fund it's ongoing
maintenance.
I am a resident of the EBLN who works in Bristol.
The EBLN has been very significant for my family. We now walk and cycle to our after
school clubs and activities rather than using the car. I also feel much more comfortable
letting my children walk around the neighbourhood, to friends houses for example,
without being worried about excess traffic and pollution.
This freedom and improvements to their health has been wonderful for us. My
daughters BMI had been a concern for us, but she is a much more healthy weight now,
and I do attribute this significantly to the increased exercise she has due to more
walking and cycling around the neighbourhood.
Again I urge that you make the EBLN permanent and fund it's ongoing maintenance.

Statement 61 – Tim Northover

I understand that WECA will be making a decision whether or not to fund permanent
infrastructure of the EBLN.
I therefore wanted to have my voice in support be heard.
As a Barton Hill resident, the EBLN has improved quality of life making streets safer and
cutting out a lot of rat running and antisocial driving.
Many residents will greatly appreciate WECA’s ongoing support for the EBLN.
Statement 62 – Amber Eastman

To the chair and council members, thank you for accepting my statement. Though we
all appreciate the opportunity to participate in council meetings, I begin to question if
our efforts are in vain?
I am writing specifically about the controversial LTN, where public confidence in our
council members to sincerely hear our concerns is waning and a dark cynicism of truly
being heard is beginning to creep in.
The gas lighting around the LTN has been absolutely extraordinary and the low traffic
neighbourhood plan is arguably one of the most contentious council traffic
policies ever attempted to be forced upon a community.
While the storm damage inflicted by the LTN in east Bristol festers and the dark LTN
clouds loom over BS3, residents have been busy gathering critical data. Data the
council themselves refuse to disclose.
We know the liveable neighbourhood consultation survey process was a manipulative
and farcical exercise. I would also add that it wasted an enormous amount of public
funds and yet, not one survey entry can be tied to anyone living in BS3. Literally, anyone
could have filled it in. The negative feedback from over 80% of BS3 businesses has been
ignored or suppressed.
A major part of what makes a neighborhood liveable is the vibrancy and variety of the
local high street. Alongside important community and religious centres, the high street
is the beating heart of our community.
It is a fact that the South Bristol LTN design will funnel so much traffic onto North st, you
won’t want to linger there. It will kill the joy of having a coffee or eating out an outdoor
cafe or restaurant. It’s also a fact that many of North street’s independent shops are so
unique, that some shop keepers claim that 50% of their customers drive in from miles
away to purchase their goods.
BS3 residents question what will the outcome be when their business rates continue to
rise and the North Street shop customer base halves? What LTN financial safety net is
being put in place to catch those who fall?
When such an unwelcome scheme is so ruthlessly pushed, despite verwhelming local
opposition - we must question, who really benefits? Certainly not the shops keepers
and certainly not the larger community as a whole. So we must dig deeper.
Any good journalist will say to follow the money.
But what is it to gain the world and lose your souls?
Just what makes BCC so determined to fracture a quiet, pleasant, safe, (((low traffic)))
perfectly healthy, functioning walking, biking and driving neighbourhood?
I dare Bristol city council members to lose face and reject the WECA money. You know
that over 75% of the community do not want the LTN and well over 80% of the business
community do not want the LTN …and so I challenge our council to regain a semblance
of moral standing, to be able to look us directly in the eyes and say you chose to put
people over profit. You chose to decline the WECA money that wants to split our
community up into broken pieces and that you chose to put the health of a well
connected community over draconian measures that will in time, lead to a major
mental health crisis.
Because people can only be separated, isolated, restricted, stressed, trapped and
endlessly taxed and fined for so long…before something breaks.
The LTN will not only break community cohesion, it will also harm the local, thriving
economy.
Your LTN baby with its money-making bells and whistles will devastate our community
and break apart an intricately-woven network of workers and families and carers and
tradespeople who for decades have been moving gently about their day to day lives.
It is evident that we don’t have a traffic problem and yet you will defiantly smash, block
and bus gate everything apart over the temptation to accept millions in funding, or the
seduction to make future millions from fines and bus gates? If that is indeed the
incentive, then honestly, it’s abhorrent.
Fact: The LTN will grind our local economy to a halt.
Fact: The LTN is not wanted because it will cause more harm than good.
In closing, we warmly welcome traffic calming measures. We welcome more trees and
nature-friendly spaces. We welcome cleaner streets and more frequent zebra
crossings.
Our councillors know what we want, but it is most categorically not the LTN in any form,
shape or measure.

Statement 63 – Benjamin Fletcher

I want to start this email with my main statement: I am a long term resident of Netham
Road BS5. Please keep the East Bristol Low Traffic Neighbourhood. It has been
transformational for the area and removing it would be a disaster. The benefits have
been enormous.
The argument against Low Traffic Neighbourhoods relies on narratives about freedom,
access, and unfair restrictions for motorists, and in some sections of the community,
conspiracy theories about 15-minute cities and state control. Proponents of car use will
point to restrictions on their personal freedoms to drive where, when and how they like.
There is a lot of evidence to draw upon to demonstrate the damage caused by having a
car as the primary source of transportation for society in general, in both direct (road
traffic accidents, etc.) and indirect ways (air pollution, etc.). This argument completely
ignores the freedoms of people in the community who either don’t have access to a car
or choose not to drive as their primary means of travel; the people who live in the
neighbourhood.
The freedoms motorists enjoy are, in effect, restrictions on the remaining members of
the community who choose to walk, cycle, or take a bus. These restrictions are due to
concerns about the dangers posed by fast-moving vehicles, reckless speeding, air
pollution, congestion, noise pollution, and the sheer volume of traffic, which is
increasingly composed of SUVs. The loudest voices against LTNs come from those who
want to drive through our neighbourhood. Our streets are just shortcuts to them; a road
to drive through, usually as quickly as possible, not neighbourhoods where people live,
play and learn.
Since the introduction of the trail scheme, the area has vastly improved: it’s noticeably
quieter, the air is cleaner, and I have seen families with children scoot, walk, and cycle
to school and around the neighbourhood. People are more present in the streets, and
there is a more peaceful, community feeling around. I can now cycle to see local friends
or visit the café, I can cycle or walk to the bouldering gym in Barton Hill, I have an
almost traffic free route to town, and with a little more thought on how to bind the LTN
with the Bristol Bath cycle path it would be completely traffic free; safe and enjoyable
for me and my niece and nephew.
Opponents of the EBLTN may cite Blackswarth Road as grounds for opposing making it
permanent, given the congestion on that road. I have lived in East Bristol for over 10
years. That road has always been a disaster. There is definitely an argument for
changing the layout and the lighting sequence. Still, if anyone thinks removing the LTN
will resolve the congestion on that road, they either have very short memories or are
being disingenuous to the extreme. Making our neighbourhood accessible to rat-
running again will not solve congestion problems; notwithstanding induced demand,
that road will always have congestion issues. People in cars need to accept that if you
choose to drive everywhere, you aren’t in traffic; you are traffic.
A city like Paris has recently led the way in introducing a more mindful approach to how
a city can be when the car is not the default mode of transportation, and cities like
Amsterdam have led the way for years. 1960’s planning has done enough damage; it’s
not too late to look forward. Please allow Bristol to take this very small step toward a
healthier, cleaner, better-connected city. It would be an enormous retrograde step
backwards and very upsetting to have the EBLTN removed.

Statement 64 – Amanda Edmondson

I am writing to express my support for the proposed South Bristol Liveable
Neighbourhood scheme, and other Liveable Neighbourhood schemes in general.
I appreciate that as a cyclist, pedestrian, non-car owner (yet qualified driver) my views
may not reflect those of car drivers, but from what I have seen in the discussions
around the SBLN within my community (Bedminster), there is a huge demand for safer
streets, more space for people, pedestrians, and a demand for a more equitable
environment - i.e. one where an 8 year old and an 80 year old can use the public spaces
that we all should have access to.
Yes, some of the interventions may mean that that there are ever so slightly fewer
spaces for parking - but I could buy a car tomorrow, remove a parking space, and no-
one would bat an eyelid. Certainly no one would accuse me of "removing a parking
space".
Liveable Neighbourhoods have become a divisive issue due to the way they've been
played in the media, and not based on the evidence. Many people naturally have a fear
of change, of the unknown, and are worried that they won't be able to use their cars at
all - of course this is not what liveable neighbourhoods aim to do. There is definitely
more work to do in bringing people along on the journey with us when we change our
streets, but it doesn't mean that we should scrap our plans and do nothing. I believe
that most people (and I've spoken to a fair few) are willing to make small sacrifices to
create safer streets for their children, and to create better places for us all.
Alan Hydes, an experienced cyclist was killed whilst cycling down North Street on a
Sunday lunchtime in January this year. This isn't something that anyone or their
friends/family should have to experience. And whilst the driver was no doubt to blame,
the fact that there is no cycle infrastructure at all on North Street is a sorry state of
affairs in 2026, in a climate crisis, in a world where we know we need to use our cars
less.
The 2019 Bike Life report found that:
• 62% of Bristol residents would like to see more government spending on cycling
• 66% of Bristol residents think fewer motor vehicles on our streets would be
useful to help them cycling more
• 70% of residents support building more protected on-road cycle tracks, even
when this would mean less room for other road traffic
Source: [link redacted]
So with this evidence in mind, I would urge you to continue to support the South Bristol
Liveable Neighbourhood, and liveable neighbourhoods in general.
