Committee details - West of England Combined Authority Committee - Modern Council 

Skip to main content 

Section menu 

Calendar 

Committee information 

Constitution 

Decisions 

Officer decisions 

Forward plans 

Library 

Meetings 

Search documents 

Subscribe to updates 

What's New 

Return to main site 

Home 
Committee details 

Committee details

West of England Combined Authority Committee

Browse meetings and agendas for this committee 

View attendance statistics 

View declarations of interest 

Subscribe to RSS feed 

Purpose of committee

The West of England Combined 
Authority Committee is chaired by the Mayor and is made up of the Leaders from the three 
Councils in the region – Bath & North East Somerset 
(Leader, Cllr Kevin Guy), Bristol City Council (Leader, Cllr Tony 
Dyer) and South Gloucestershire Council (Co-leader, Cllr Ian 
Boulton). The Chair of the West of England Local Enterprise 
Partnership, Richard Bonner, also attends Committee 
meetings. 

  

Please note 
– from January 2020 to October 2021 the 
Combined Authority Committee met jointly with the West of England 
Joint Committee – this joint meeting was the main member 
decision-taking meeting.  Prior to January 2020, and since 
October 2021, the Combined Authority Committee and the Joint 
Committee meet separately on the same day. 

For agenda papers from January 
2020 to October 2021, please refer to papers listed under: 
Joint meeting - West of England Combined Authority 
Committee and West of England Joint 
Committee . 

  

WRITTEN PUBLIC QUESTIONS 

1. Any member of the public can 
submit a maximum of two written questions in advance of a 
meeting. 

2. The deadline for the 
submission of questions is 5.00pm, at least 3 clear working days 
ahead of a meeting. 

3. Questions should be 
addressed to the Chair of the meeting and e-mailed to democratic.services@westofengland-ca.gov.uk . 

4. Under the direction of the 
Chair, wherever possible, written replies to questions will be sent 
to questioners by the end of the working day prior to the 
meeting. 

5. Please note - under the 
Combined Authority’s committee procedures, there is no 
opportunity for oral supplementary questions to be asked at 
committee meetings. 

6. The written questions and 
replies will be circulated to committee members in advance of the 
meeting and published on the Combined Authority website. 

  

PUBLIC STATEMENTS 

1. Any member of the public may 
submit a written statement (or petition) to a meeting. 

2. Please note that one 
statement per individual is permitted. 

3. Statements must be submitted 
in writing and received by the deadline of 12 noon on the working 
day before the meeting. Statements should be emailed to democratic.services@westofengland-ca.gov.uk . 

4. Statements will be listed for meetings in the 
order of receipt. All statements will be sent to committee members 
in advance of the meeting and published on the Combined Authority 
website. 

5.  Please note : If any member of 
the public wishes to attend the meeting to orally present their 
statement, they are asked please to notify the Combined 
Authority’s Democratic Services team of this at the point 
when their statement is submitted and by 12noon on the working day 
before the meeting at the very latest.  

6. For those presenting their statements at the 
meeting, up to 3 minutes ‘speaking time’ is permitted 
for each statement. The total time available for the public session 
at meetings is 30 minutes . 

 

Membership 

Mayor Helen Godwin   (Chair)  West of England Combined Authority

Cllr Kevin Guy     Bath & North East Somerset Council

Cllr Tony Dyer     Bristol City Council

Cllr Ian Boulton     South Gloucestershire Council

Richard Bonner     Local Enterprise Partnership Board (Non-Voting Member)

Chair of Audit Committee (Invitee)     Bristol City Council

Reserve members

Cllr Maggie Tyrrell     South Gloucestershire Council

Cllr Alison Evans     South Gloucestershire Council

Cllr Sarah Warren     Bath & North East Somerset Council

Cllr Manda Rigby     Bath & North East Somerset Council

Cllr Heather Mack     Bristol City Council

Cllr Ed Plowden     Bristol City Council

Contact information

Postal address: 

West of England Combined Authority 

70 Redcliff Street
Bristol
BS1 6AL 

Phone: 
0743 660 0459

Email: 
democratic.services@westofengland-ca.gov.uk 

 

Calendar 

Committee information 

Constitution 

Decisions 

Officer decisions 

Forward plans 

Library 

Meetings 

Search documents 

Subscribe to updates 

What's New 

Return to main site 

© Civica UK Ltd.
