Committee Report

KEY DECISION OR FOR INFORMATION: For Information

COMMITTEE: Transport and Connectivity Committee

DATE: 19 March 2026

TITLE: Workplace Parking Levy Update

Ward(s): Citywide

Officer presenting the report: Adam Crowther Job title: Head of City Transport

Committee Chair: Ed Plowden

Executive Director lead: John Smith: Executive Director for Growth & Regeneration

Proposal origin: Committee Chair

Purpose of Report:

To update the committee on progress with the Workplace Parking Levy Outline Business Case
(OBC) and to outline progress on key project milestones.

Evidence Base

1. In September 2024, the Transport and Connectivity committee approved up to £1 million for
development of a Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) project, including the OBC, and agreed
to receive further reports once key milestones are met.

2. A Workplace Parking Levy is proposed as part of Bristol City Council’s transport strategy to
reduce congestion and generate revenue for transport improvements. It aims to discourage
car commuting, promote walking, cycling, and public transport, and improve health, the
environment, and land use efficiency.

3. The development of a Workplace Parking Levy scheme involves three key stages; Outline
Business Case (2025–2026), Public Consultation and Full Business Case with approval
(2026–2027), and Implementation and Operation (2028–2029).

4. The OBC programme is currently in progress, with a planned end date of June 2026.

Stage Date Revised date
Supporting studies and April to Sept 2025 Complete
information
Surveys and data collection October to November to early March
November 2025 2026
Modelling, forecasting and November to January March to April 2026
impact assessment 2026
Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
WPL scheme development November to March April to May 2026
2026
WPL package and final OBC January to April 2026 May to June 2026

5. Initial engagement with employer representative groups took place in November and
December 2025 via online webinars and meetings. An online parking survey was sent out
to workplaces via Bristol City Council, Bristol BID, Business West and Visit Bristol. The
survey results will be used to estimate the likely number of Workplace Parking Places
(WPPs) in Bristol. Only those organisations that are estimated to have more than five
workplace parking places were asked to complete the survey as it is not the intention that
smaller businesses would be liable for the WPL if a scheme is taken forward.

6. The programme timeline has been adjusted due to a lower-than-expected response rate to
the initial online parking survey. As the survey forms a critical input to the modelling and
impact assessment work, it was essential to ensure that the data collected was robust,
representative, and sufficiently comprehensive.

7. Following the limited initial response, additional data-collection methods, such as
door-knocking, telephone surveys, and targeted off-street parking audits were undertaken
to supplement the dataset. While these measures have significantly strengthened the
quality and reliability of the information gathered, they required more time to complete than
originally planned. As a result, the surveys and data collection stage extended into early
March 2026, and the subsequent stages of modelling, scheme development, and OBC
preparation were pushed back accordingly.

8. Approximately 570 workplaces have been contacted; this includes schools and colleges
across Bristol. Ninety-two responses were received to the online parking survey, which
includes some of the city’s largest employers such as Bristol University, University
Hospitals Bristol and Weston NHS Foundation Trust and The Bristol Port Company. In
addition, parking data was collected through door-knocking and telephone surveys for a
further 30 businesses. As a follow up to this, off-street parking audits have been
undertaken at approximately 200 key employment locations where data was not attained
through the other data collection methods.

9. The parking data will feed into the modelling, forecasting, and impact assessment work
which is used to predict revenue and assess the likely impacts of a WPL scheme on
congestion, air quality, and economic outcomes. A range of options will be tested and
further engagement with employer groups will occur at this stage. It should be noted that
public consultation is not typically undertaken during the OBC phase so there is no plan for
this.

10. Following the results of the modelling, forecasting and impact assessment, a draft scheme
will be defined, outlining boundaries, charges, space thresholds, exemptions, and operating
hours which will be presented in the final OBC.

11. As part of the OBC, and once a scheme has been defined, it will be possible to set out
what is achievable with the estimated WPL funding. The powers to introduce WPL are
contained in the Transport Act 2000, which enables local authorities to charge for
workplace parking. A WPL is operated through a permit-style licensing scheme where
employers are required to obtain a licence for any liable workplace parking places. By law,
Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
all net revenue raised must be reinvested into improving local transport, after covering
operating costs. Any new WPL must also be approved by the Secretary of State before it
can be implemented.

12. A high-level Investment Strategy for WPL revenue will be drafted; this will be linked with
several workstreams such as the Transport Investment Strategy (TIS) and the Transport
Infrastructure Plan (TIP) that are currently being progressed by the City Transport Team.

13. The TIS will set out Bristol’s transport revenue streams and guide how this funding can be
reinvested to improve transport outcomes. It will provide tools to forecast income, for
example, from parking and bus shelter advertising, and assess the value for money of
broad investment areas such as public transport, cycling, and maintenance.

14. The TIP will provide the overarching framework for how Bristol prioritises and sequences
transport schemes, setting out the city’s strategic transport objectives and the
improvements needed to support housing growth, economic recovery, and sustainable
travel. The TIP summarises and, where necessary, expands on infrastructure
improvements outlined across the suite of documents supporting the Bristol Transport
Strategy and Joint Local Transport Plan 4. It will guide decisions on which schemes should
come forward first by focusing on reliability, reducing congestion, supporting inclusive and
affordable travel options, and making best use of limited street space through prioritising
walking, cycling and public transport. The TIP will be subject to public consultation and will
require committee sign off.

15. The WPL can be positioned as a key mechanism for funding the city’s transport priorities.
While the TIP provides the overarching framework for major capital investment, WPL
revenue can also support the broader transport policy agenda. It could also help unlock
match funding from sources such as the Transforming City Regions Fund, increasing the
value of local investment and enabling a more ambitious programme of improvements than
would otherwise be possible.

16. WPL revenue can also be directed towards priority revenue-funded transport programmes.
These may include measures to improve bus services, such as operational support for the
existing network, enhancements to the passenger experience, and should future policy
development take that direction, work to explore or progress options such as bus
franchising or alternative bus service improvement models permitted under current
legislation. Funding could also support network management functions and transport
behavioural-change initiatives, all of which are essential to improving the performance and
reliability of the wider system.

17. To understand business views on how WPL revenue should be invested, the online parking
survey included a question on preferred transport improvements. The results show that
local bus enhancements are by far the most preferred, with the highest support for
increased frequencies and new routes, followed by reduced bus fares. Cycling
improvements also score strongly, along with support for rail upgrades.

Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
Alternative options considered:

No alternative options are currently recommended as the approach is in line with advice
received from Nottingham City Council who are the only local authority in the country to
successfully implement at WPL so far.

When the project comes to committee for approval at subsequent stages of the programme,
different options will be presented from the modelling.

Officer Recommendations:

That the Committee for Transport and Connectivity notes this update report.

Corporate Strategy alignment:
1. Children and young people - improved access to transport schemes and initiatives will
help ensure all children and young people have a good start in life.
2. Economy and skills – the scheme will help tackle congestion which can have a significant
negative impact on economic growth. Revenue from a WPL scheme will help ensure
people have improved access to jobs, skills and training.
3. Environment and sustainability – the scheme will help reduce congestion and in turn will
work towards BCC carbon and air quality ambitions. It will also contribute to BCC climate
and ecological emergencies.
4. Healthcare and wellbeing – the scheme will help tackle health inequalities by providing
people with improved access to a range of sustainable transport opportunities such as
walking and cycling that will help improve their health and wellbeing.
5. Homes and communities – the scheme can help increase revenue towards transport
schemes that can provide more healthy, resilient and inclusive neighbourhoods.
6. Transport and connectivity – a WPL can enable investment in a more
reliable, convenient and safer network of public transport and infrastructure for walking and
cycling.
7. Effective development organisation – the project aligns with our One City approach of
working with our partners to deliver long-term ambitions for the city.

Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
City Benefits:

1. The introduction of a WPL has benefits associated with a reduction in car use and
a subsequent increase in the use of alternative modes such as walking, cycling and
public transport. In turn this will have a positive impact on people’s health.
2. A reduction in car trips into the city centre is likely to result in a reduction in the amount
of carbon emissions.
3. A reduction in the number of car trips will have a beneficial impact on air quality.
4. Improved air quality and a reduction in traffic noise will have a beneficial impact on
health.
5. A reduction in car-based trips will help reduce congestion and the negative impacts
associated with this such as delays and the negative impact this has on economic
growth.
6. The greatest potential benefit will be through the transport measures/schemes that can
be funded through the revenue raised by a WPL. The revenue should
be substantial, predictable and locally generated and will significantly help BCC to
develop and deliver transport infrastructure and initiatives in the longer term.
7. The additional revenue generated could fund more sustainable transport options which
are particularly beneficial to younger, older people and disabled people who tend to
have more limited access to a car and rely more on public transport to access key
services such as education and healthcare.

Consultation Details:

1. A WPL is referenced in and consulted on as part of Joint Local Transport Plan 4 and the
Bristol Transport Strategy.
2. A Stakeholder Management Strategy and accompanying Communications Plan form part
of the OBC stage of the work.
3. A Stakeholder Radar has already been produced as part of the Feasibility Study
undertaken by Nottingham CC; this outlines those stakeholders who will be both vital and
necessary to engage and consult with as part of the programme. Further information on
this is outlined from page 38 onwards of the Feasibility Study (see Appendix A).
5. Formal public consultation is proposed as part of Stage Two of the WPL project if it
progresses beyond the OBC stage.
6. Further updates will be brought to the Transport Connectivity Committee as the project
progresses.
7. At the end of the Stage One programme, a proposal will be brought back to the Transport
and Connectivity Policy Committee for approval and to progress to the next stage.

Background Documents:
1. Appendix A: Feasibility Study Report for a WPL Scheme in Bristol – Final Draft.
2. 12 September 2024 Transport and Connectivity Committee Workplace Parking Levy
report
3. 15 May 2025 Transport and Connectivity Committee Workplace Parking Levy report
4. 23rd October 2025 Transport and Connectivity Policy Committee Workplace Parking Levy
Update Report

Revenue £1 million Source of Revenue Clean Air Zone Fund
Cost Funding

Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
Capital Cost £ Source of Capital
Funding
One off cost ☒ Ongoing Saving Proposal ☐ If yes - existing or new saving? N/A
cost ☐ OR Income generation proposal ☐

Professional comments section:

1. Finance Advice:

The purpose of this report is to update the committee on progress with the Workplace Parking
Levy Outline Business Case (OBC) and to outline progress on key project milestones.

The development of the Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) Outline Business Case (OBC) was
approved with a budget of £1 million, funded through the Clean Air Zone Fund. This allocation
covers supporting studies, surveys, modelling, scheme development, and stakeholder
engagement during the OBC stage. The current expenditure is a one-off cost for the
development of the OBC. There are no ongoing costs identified at this stage.

If the Workplace Parking Levy (WPL) scheme proceeds, it is anticipated to provide a
consistent and locally generated revenue stream. This funding would be dedicated to
improving transport infrastructure and supporting sustainable travel options, helping to
deliver long-term objectives for connectivity and climate action. Future capital requirements
will be considered during the Full Business Case stage, with potential funding sources such
as grants or prudential borrowing.

Finance Business Partner: Vivi Sargioti – Finance Business Partner Growth &
Regeneration, 13 January 2026

2. Legal Advice:

As the purpose of this report is to update the committee on progress, there are no legal
issues associated with this report or its recommendations at this stage.

Legal Team Leader: Dawn Bodill – Specialist Solicitor – Property, Planning and Transport
Team – 5 February 2026 (Team Leader not available).

3. Implications on IT: I can see no implications on IT arising from this report.

IT Team Leader: Alex Simpson – Lead Enterprise Architect – 10 February 2026

4. HR Advice: There are no HR implications evident

HR Partner: Celia Williams, HR Business Partner, 24 February 2026

APPENDICES

Appendix A – Further essential background / detail on the proposal YES

Appendix B – Equality Impact Assessment (EqIA) YES

Appendix C – Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) NO
Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
Appendix D – Decision Risk Assessment NO

Appendix E – Exempt Information NO

Appendix F – Details of consultation carried out - internal and external NO

Appendix G – Options appraisal matrix NO

Appendix H – Business case / financial analysis NO

Template approved March 25

OFFICIAL
