Managing public money - GOV.UK 

Cookies on GOV.UK

We use some essential cookies to make this website work.
We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services.
We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services.

You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. 

You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. 

Accept additional cookies 

Reject additional cookies 

View cookies 

Hide cookie message

Skip to main content 

GOV.UK 

Navigation menu

Menu

Menu 

Services and information

Benefits 

Births, death, marriages and care 

Business and self-employed 

Childcare and parenting 

Citizenship and living in the UK 

Crime, justice and the law 

Disabled people 

Driving and transport 

Education and learning 

Employing people 

Environment and countryside 

Housing and local services 

Money and tax 

Passports, travel and living abroad 

Visas and immigration 

Working, jobs and pensions 

Government activity

Departments 
Departments, agencies and public bodies

News 
News stories, speeches, letters and notices

Guidance and regulation 
Detailed guidance, regulations and rules

Research and statistics 
Reports, analysis and official statistics

Policy papers and consultations 
Consultations and strategy

Transparency 
Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports

Search GOV.UK

×

Search GOV.UK

Search

Search GOV.UK 

Search

Home 

Government 

Government efficiency, transparency and accountability 

Government spending 

Guidance

Managing public money

This publication offers guidance on how to handle public funds.

From: 

HM Treasury 

Published 
14 May 2012 
Last updated 

16 April 2026
— 
See all updates

Get emails about this page 

Documents

Managing Public Money 

PDF , 1.52 MB , 298 pages 

Template for special severance cases 

MS Word Document , 42.5 KB 

Delegated Authority Guidance: Expenditure categories subject to specific controls 

PDF , 188 KB , 20 pages 

This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology.

Request an accessible format.

If you use assistive technology (such as a screen reader) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format, please email digital.communications@hmtreasury.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need. It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use.

Template Delegated Authority Letter 

MS Word Document , 67.9 KB 

Details

This 2023 version updates the 2021 version,  previous versions may be found via the National Archives. 

The public, and Parliament acting on their behalf, have a right to expect that funds raised using powers agreed by Parliament will be used for the purposes intended. Public servants have a demanding fiduciary duty to use public money responsibly.

Much of what managing public money requires is just good common sense, or sound financial management. There are also some specific rules and conventions about how certain things are handled, which ensure that policies, programmes and projects work smoothly and serve their intended purposes.

Updates to this page

Published 14 May 2012

Last updated 16 April 2026
— 

Show all updates

16 April 2026 
The updates to Managing Public Money incorporate new guidance on the interpretation of ‘Novel, Contentious and Repercussive’ to Chapter 2 and Annex 2.2. A correction has also been made to a heading in Table A1.1.B. 

Delegated Authority Guidance: Expenditure categories subject to specific controls added.

12 June 2025 
Managing public money 2025 version updates the 2023 version.

4 May 2023 
Updated with the 2023 version.

20 September 2022 
Template Delegated Authority Letter updated

4 March 2022 
Managing Public Money updated

3 June 2021 
Template Delegated Authority Letter added

21 May 2021 
Annex 2.2, 4.15 and 5.4 updated

21 May 2021 
Annex 4.15 updated

19 May 2021 
Updated 'Managing Public Money' document and 2 specimen framework documents added

1 October 2019 
Updated with revised version of 'Managing Public Money (with annexes)'.

20 September 2018 
Updated with 'Managing Public Money' and 'Managing Public Money (with annexes)'.

7 March 2018 
Updated Annex 6.2 in Managing Public Money (including annexes).

23 January 2017 
Updated template for special severance cases with further guidance on how to complete and return the form.

30 November 2016 
Removed contact details for Jim Duncan who has since left the post

7 August 2015 
Updated to reflect several changes to guidance in Annexes. Further details are set out in the 'Dear Accounting Officer' letter dated 8/15.

12 July 2013 
updated for 2013 version

14 May 2012 
First published.

Sign up for emails or print this page

Get emails about this page 

Print this page 

Related content

Collection

Government Commercial Function: Standards 

Government Finance Function 

Explore the topic

Government spending 

Is this page useful?

Maybe

Yes this page is useful 

No this page is not useful 

Thank you for your feedback

Report a problem with this page

Help us improve GOV.UK

Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details.

This field is for robots only. Please leave blank 

What were you doing? 

What went wrong? 

Send 

Cancel 

Help us improve GOV.UK

To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today.
Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab ) .

Cancel 

Services and information

Benefits 

Births, death, marriages and care 

Business and self-employed 

Childcare and parenting 

Citizenship and living in the UK 

Crime, justice and the law 

Disabled people 

Driving and transport 

Education and learning 

Employing people 

Environment and countryside 

Housing and local services 

Money and tax 

Passports, travel and living abroad 

Visas and immigration 

Working, jobs and pensions 

Government activity

Departments 

News 

Guidance and regulation 

Research and statistics 

Policy papers and consultations 

Transparency 

How government works 

Get involved 

Support links

Help 

Privacy 

Cookies 

Accessibility statement 

Contact 

Terms and conditions 

Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg 

Government Digital Service 

All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 , except where otherwise stated

© Crown copyright
