PART 4.2 - ACCESS TO INFORMATION PROCEDURE
RULES (APR)

APR1
SCOPE

Save as mentioned below, these rules apply to all meetings of the Council, area
committees and meetings of any committee or sub committee appointed by the Council.
The rules set out in this Section shall not apply to meetings of the Licensing Committee or
sub-committees which shall be governed by Regulations made under Section 9 of the
Licensing Act 2003 and any future rules determined by the Licensing Committee under
that Section.

APR2
ADDITIONAL RIGHTS TO INFORMATION

These rules do not affect any more specific rights to information contained elsewhere in
this constitution or the law.

APR3
RIGHTS TO ATTEND MEETINGS

Members of the public may attend all meetings subject only to the exceptions in these
rules.

APR4
NOTICES OF MEETING

(1) The proper officer will give at least five clear working days’ notice of any meeting,
with the exception of Full Council where the summons will be issued six clear working
day in advance, by posting details of the meeting on the Council’s website.
Notice required - 5 clear working days
Full Council – 6 clear working days

(2) Where it is necessary to hold a meeting in private and exclude the press and public
in order to consider exempt or confidential information, notice of the intention to hold
such a meeting will be published in the Forward Plan and the provisions of APR5
(access to agenda and reports before the meeting) will apply.

APR5
ACCESS TO AGENDA AND REPORTS BEFORE THE MEETING
(see also APR 9)

(1) The proper officer will make copies of the agenda and reports open to the public
available for inspection on the Council’s website not less than five clear working days
before the meeting. If an item is added to the agenda later, the revised agenda

MAY 2024 PART 4.2: ACCESS TO INFORMATION
PROCEDURE RULES
(where reports are prepared after the summons has been sent out, the proper officer
shall make each such report available to the public as soon as the report is
completed and sent to Councillors) will be open to inspection at the time the item was
added to the agenda.

(2) A summons to attend Council meetings will be emailed to members at least 6 clear
working days before the meeting.

(3) In respect of a meeting of a Policy Committee, or a Sub-committee of a Policy
Committee the proper officer will:

(i) At least 28 clear days before a private meeting (e.g. where one or more of the
reports on the agenda includes “exempt information”) a notice of the intention to
hold part or all of the meeting in private must be included in the Forward Plan
published on the website by the Proper Officer and be available for inspection.
The notice must state the intention that the meeting is to be held in private.

(ii) At least 5 clear days before a private meeting a further notice of the intention to
hold part or all of the meeting in private must be included in the agenda
published on the website by the Proper Officer and be available for inspection.
The notice must:

(a) state the reasons for the meeting to be held in private;

(b) provide details of any representations received about why the meeting
should be open to the public; and

(c) include a statement of the Council’s response to any such representations.

(iii) Where the date by which a private meeting must be held makes compliance
with (i) and (ii) above impracticable, the meeting may only be held in private
where agreement has been obtained by the relevant Director from the Chair
and Vice-chair of the relevant policy committee, the Monitoring Officer and the
Section 151 Officer that the meeting is urgent and cannot reasonably be
deferred. As soon as reasonably practicable after such agreement has been
obtained, a further notice must be published on the agenda on the website and
be available for inspection, setting out the reasons why the meeting is urgent
and cannot reasonably be deferred.

APR6
SUPPLY OF COPIES

The Council will supply copies of:

(i) any agenda and reports which are open to public inspection;

MAY 2024 PART 4.2: ACCESS TO INFORMATION
PROCEDURE RULES
(ii) any further statements or particulars necessary to indicate the nature of the items in
the agenda; and

(iii) if the proper officer thinks fit, copies of any other documents supplied to Councillors
in connection with an item to any person on payment of a charge for postage and any
other costs.

APR7
ACCESS TO MINUTES ETC AFTER THE MEETING

The Council will make available copies of the following for six years after a meeting:

(i) the minutes of the meeting or records of decisions taken, together with reasons, for
all meetings, excluding any part of the minutes of proceedings when the meeting was
not open to the public or which disclose exempt or confidential information;

(ii) a summary of any proceedings not open to the public where the minutes open to
inspection would not provide a reasonably fair and coherent record;

(iii) the agenda for the meeting; and

(iv) reports relating to items when the meeting was open to the public.
Time limit - 6 years

APR8
BACKGROUND PAPERS

APR8.1
List of background papers

The report author will set out in every report a list of those documents (called background
papers) relating to the subject matter of the report which in their opinion:

(i) disclose any facts or matters on which the report or an important part of the report is
based; and

(ii) which have been relied on to a material extent in preparing the report but does not
include published works or those which disclose exempt or confidential information
(as defined in APR 10).

APR8.2
Public inspection of background papers

The Council will make available for public inspection for four years after the date of the
meeting one copy of each of the documents on the list of background papers.
Time limit - 4 years

MAY 2024 PART 4.2: ACCESS TO INFORMATION
PROCEDURE RULES
APR9
SUMMARY OF THE RIGHTS OF THE PUBLIC
A written summary of the rights of the public to attend meetings and to inspect and copy
documents must be kept at and available to the public on the Council’s website.

APR10
EXCLUSION OF ACCESS BY THE PUBLIC TO MEETINGS

APR10.1
Confidential information – requirement to exclude public

The public must be excluded from meetings whenever it is likely in view of the nature of
the business to be transacted or the nature of the proceedings that confidential information
would be disclosed.

Confidential information means information given to the Council by a government
department on terms which forbid its public disclosure or information which cannot be
publicly disclosed by court order.

APR10.2
Exempt information – discretion to exclude public

The public may be excluded from meetings whenever it is likely in view of the nature of the
business to be transacted or the nature of the proceedings that exempt information would
be disclosed.

Where the meeting will determine any person’s civil rights or obligations, or adversely
affect their possessions, Article 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 establishes a presumption
that the meeting will be held in public unless a private hearing is appropriate and lawful.

Exempt information is information falling within one of the categories set out in APR 10.3.
However, information which would otherwise be exempt will not be exempt if it relates to
proposed development for which the local planning authority can grant itself planning
permission under Regulation 3 Town and Country Planning General Regulations 1992.

APR10.3
Meaning of exempt information

“Exempt information” means information for the time being defined in the Local Authorities
(Access to Information) (Variation) Order 2006 which amends Part 1 Schedule 12A of the
Local Government Act 1972. The categories of exempt information and relevant
qualifications are:

Category Qualifications
1 Information relating to any individual.
2 Information which is likely to reveal the
identity of an individual.

MAY 2024 PART 4.2: ACCESS TO INFORMATION
PROCEDURE RULES
3 Information relating to the financial or Information falling within this paragraph
business affairs of any particular person is not exempt information by virtue of this
(including the authority holding that paragraph if it is required to be
information) registered under:
(a) the Companies Act 1985
(b) the Friendly Societies Act 1974
(c) the Friendly Societies Act 1992
(d) the Industrial and Provident
Societies Act
(e) the Building Societies Act 1986; or
(f) the Charities Act 1993.

4 Information relating to any consultations
or negotiations, or contemplated
consultations or negotiations, in
connection with any labour matters
relations matter arising between the
authority or a Minister of the Crown and
employees of, or office holders under,
the authority.

5 Information in respect of which a claim
for legal professional privilege could be
maintained in legal proceedings.

6 Information which reveals that the
authority proposes:
(a) to give any enactment under or by
virtue of which requirements are
imposed on a person; or
(b) to make an order or direction under
any enactment.

7 Information relating to any action taken
or to be taken in connection with the
prevention, investigation or prosecution
of crime.

8 Information is not exempt information if it
relates to proposed development for
which the local planning authority may
grant itself planning permission pursuant
to regulation 3 of the Town and Country
Planning General Regulations 1992.
Information which falls within any of sections 1 to 7 above; and is not prevented from
being exempt by virtue of the qualification in section 8 or the qualification to section 3 is

MAY 2024 PART 4.2: ACCESS TO INFORMATION
PROCEDURE RULES
exempt information if, and so long as, in all the circumstances of the case, the public
interest in maintaining the exemption outweighs the public interest in disclosing the
information.

APR11
EXCLUSION OF ACCESS BY THE PUBLIC TO REPORTS

If the proper officer thinks fit, the Council may exclude access by the public to reports
which in their opinion relate to items during which, in accordance with APR 10 (exclusions
of press and public to meetings), the meeting is likely not to be open to the public. Such
reports will be marked “Not for publication” together with the category of information likely
to be disclosed.

APR12
APPLICATION OF RULES TO POLICY COMMITTEES

(1) Rules APR 13 – 18 apply to meetings of Policy committees. If a Policy Committee
meets to take a key decision then it must also comply with APR 1 – 11 unless APR
15 (general exception) or APR 16 (special urgency) apply. A key decision is as
defined in Article 14.03 of this constitution.

(2) If a Policy Committee meets to discuss a key decision to be taken collectively, with
an officer other than a political assistant present, within 28 days of the date according
to the forward plan by which it is to be decided, then it must also comply with APR 1
– 11 unless APR 15 (general exception) or APR 16 (special urgency) apply. A key
decision is as defined in Article 14.03 of this constitution.

(3) This requirement does not include meetings, whose sole purpose is for officers to
brief Councillors.

APR13
PROCEDURE BEFORE TAKING KEY DECISIONS

Subject to APR5 (access to agendas and reports before a meeting) and APR15 (general
exception) and APR16 (special urgency), a key decision may not be taken unless:

(i) a notice (called here a forward plan) has been published in connection with the
matter in question;

(ii) at least 28 calendar days have elapsed since the publication of the forward plan; and

(iii) where the decision is to be taken at a meeting of a Policy Committee , notice of the
meeting has been given in accordance with APR 4 (notice of meetings).

MAY 2024 PART 4.2: ACCESS TO INFORMATION
PROCEDURE RULES
APR14
THE FORWARD PLAN

Forward plans will be prepared in respect of each of the Policy Committees and published
by the Proper Officer on a monthly basis.

APR14.1
Contents of forward plan

(1) The forward plan will contain matters which the Proper Officer, in consultation with
the Chair and Vice Chair of the relevant Policy Committee, has reason to believe will
be subject of a key decision to be taken by a Policy Committee. It will describe the
following particulars in so far as the information is available or might reasonably be
obtained:

(i) the matter in respect of which a decision is to be made;

(ii) where the decision taker is an individual, their name and title, if any and where
the decision taker is a body, its name and details of membership;

(iii) the date on which, or the period within which, the decision will be taken;

(iv) the identity of the principal groups whom the decision taker proposes to consult
before taking the decision;

(v) the means by which any such consultation is proposed to be undertaken;

(vi) the steps any person might take who wishes to make representations to the
decision taker about the matter in respect of which the decision is to be made,
and the date by which those steps must be taken; and

(vii) background papers relating to the subject matter of the report. The forward
plan must be published at least twenty-eight days before the start of the period
covered.
Notice required - 28 days

(2) Exempt information need not be included in a forward plan and confidential
information cannot be included.

APR15
GENERAL EXCEPTION

If a matter which is likely to be a key decision has not been included in the forward plan,
then subject to APR 16 (special urgency), the decision may still be taken if:

MAY 2024 PART 4.2: ACCESS TO INFORMATION
PROCEDURE RULES
(i) the decision must be taken by such a date that it is impracticable to defer the
decision until it has been included in the next forward plan and until the start of
the first month to which the next forward plan relates;

(ii) the proper officer has given notice to the Leader of the Council in writing, of the
matter to which the decision is to be made;

(iii) the proper officer has made copies of that notice available to the public at the
offices of the council; and

(iv) at least five clear working days have elapsed since the proper officer complied
with (i) and (ii).
Notice required - 5 clear working days

APR16
SPECIAL URGENCY

If by virtue of the date by which a decision must be taken APR 15 (general exception)
cannot be followed, then the decision can only be taken if the decision taker (if an
individual) or the chair of the body making the decision, obtains:

(i) the agreement of the chair and vice-chair of the relevant Policy Committee and the
Monitoring Officer and the Section 151 Officer that the taking of the decision cannot
be reasonably deferred.

APR17
REPORTS TO FULL COUNCIL

APR17.1
Quarterly reports on special urgency decisions

The Proper Officer will submit quarterly reports to the Full Council on the Policy Committee
decisions taken in the circumstances set out in APR16 (special urgency) in the preceding
three months. The report will include the number of decisions so taken and a summary of
the matters in respect of which those decisions were taken.

APR18.1
OFFICER DECISION NOTICES

Officer decisions as identified in (i) and (ii) below, will be published as soon as reasonably
practical and will be made available for inspection on the Council’s website. The record
will include a statement of the reasons for each decision and any alternative options
considered;

(i) All officer decisions involving a resource commitment of between £100k and £500k
shall be taken in consultation with the Chair of the relevant Policy Committee.

MAY 2024 PART 4.2: ACCESS TO INFORMATION
PROCEDURE RULES
The officer decision notice published by the Officer taking the decision shall also
include reference to the name of the Chair of the relevant Policy Committee to signify
their agreement with the decision made.

(ii) Officer decisions that raise issues of public importance having regard to the general
principles applying to the exercise of delegated powers set out in Part 3 of the
constitution.

The Chair or a relevant Policy Committee reserves the right, in consultation with the
Vice-chair of a relevant Policy Committee and the Monitoring Officer and Section 151
Officer to refer a matter that would otherwise be the subject of an officer decision to
the next available meeting of the relevant Policy Committee for decision.

MAY 2024 PART 4.2: ACCESS TO INFORMATION
PROCEDURE RULES
