Joint Local Transport Plan 4
2020-2036
March 2020
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Contents
Section Page Section Page

Climate change – the challenge ahead 5 Section 5: Improving connectivity 33
Making a difference 5 Beyond the West of England 34
The challenge 5 Within the West of England 34
Encouraging modal shift 5 Local 35
JLTP4 and ongoing review 6 Neighbourhood 35
Government role 6 Section 6: Connectivity beyond
Where we want to be in 2036 6 the West of England 37
JLTP4 and the Local Industrial Strategy 7 Beyond West of England challenges 37
Section 1: Setting the scene 9 Beyond West of England policies
The West of England 9 and interventions 37

Climate emergency 10 B1 Enhance competitiveness of major
gateways and improve connectivity
Managing demand 10 to international markets 37
Joint Transport Study 11 B2 Improve strategic resilience
Local Industrial Strategy 11 of the network for all trips 41
Sustainable Development Goals 11 Section 7: Connectivity within
Transport in the West of England 12 the West of England 49
Local Transport Plans 13 Within West of England challenges 49
Public consultation 17 Within West of England policies and
Updating and reviewing the JLTP4 18 interventions 49
Section 2: Transport challenges W1 Provide more public transport options
in the West of England 19 and improve service quality 50
Section 3: Vision and objectives 25
W2 Provide for journeys where public
transport is not an option 61
Vision 25
W3 Use, as appropriate, measures and
Objectives 25 technological advances to influence
Outcomes 25 and better manage the demand of
Where we need to be in 2030 27 private car use 65
Where we want to be in 2036 27 W4 Improve resilience of the network,
And where will we go next 27 providing increased reliability 71
W5 Enable business clustering and
Section 4: Embracing technology
the efficient movement of freight 77
and partnerships 29
Technological advances and innovation 29
Advancing together 30
Maintaining and developing
wider partnerships 32

2
March 2020

Section Page Section Page

Section 8: Local connectivity 83 Section 11: Major schemes and summary
Local challenges 83 of interventions 127
Local policies and interventions 83 Major schemes 127
L1 Enable walking and cycling, ‘active Transformational 130
modes of travel’, to be the preferred Early investment schemes (including
choice for shorter journeys 84 committed projects) 131
L2 Reduce the number and severity Joint Transport Study required schemes 134
of casualties for all road users 91 Working with partners to build our
L3 Encourage residents and employees current programme 136
to make more sustainable and Summary of Interventions 136
healthier travel choices 94
Section 12: Targets, indicators,
L4 Support opportunities for all sectors monitoring 139
of the population to access the
services they require, wherever Background 139
they live 100 Developing indicators 139
L5 Support the identification and Monitoring indicators 139
implementation of measures that Modal shift target 140
will improve air quality 105 Risks associated with meeting targets 141
Section 9: Neighbourhood connectivity 111 Summary of indicators 141
Neighbourhood challenges 111 Section 13: Environmental, equalities
Neighbourhood policies and interventions 111 and health impact assessments of JLTP4 147
N1. Use master planning and local design Introduction 147
to create better places 111 Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA)
N2 Facilitate the use of active modes for summary 147
all short trips, including the first and Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA)
last mile of longer journeys 118 summary 150
Section 10: Funding and implementation 123 Equalities Impact Assessment (EqIA)
Introduction 123 summary 153
Current situation 123 Health Impact Assessment (HIA) summary 153
The funding gap 124 SEA consultation 154
Additional sources of funding 125 Monitoring and next steps 154
Glossary 155
Appendices
1 Summary of Environmental Report 159
2 Scheme Summary Table – categories 169
3 Major scheme details 171
4 JLTP4 Consultation Report 187

3
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

What is the Joint Local Transport
Plan 4?
The Joint Local Transport Plan 4 (JLTP4) - led by
the West of England Combined Authority, working
with Bath & North East Somerset, Bristol, North
Somerset and South Gloucestershire councils
– looks at transport up to 2036. It sets out how
we aim to achieve a well-connected sustainable
transport network that works for residents,
businesses and visitors across the region; a
network that offers greater, realistic travel choices
and makes walking, cycling and public transport
the natural way to travel.

A note to the text
To demonstrate how the JLTP4 policies contribute
towards delivering the objectives and outcomes, a
series of icons have been developed. There is one
icon for each objective, with the numbers below the
icons showing which outcomes the policy is likely
to make the largest contribution towards achieving.
The icons are included next to each policy at the
start of the connectivity sections (Sections 6–9).
and inclusive economic growth (EG) £ or graph of arrows increasing
mprove accessibility (EA) equal sign or open door

The objectives are:
lity and take action against climate change (CC) thermometer/cloud
health, wellbeing, safety and security (H) heart
(BP) google pin/ tree/sunshine

Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG) £ or graph of arrows increasing

Take action against climate change and
Enable equality and improve accessibility (EA)
Address poor air quality and take action against climate change (CC)
Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety and security (H)
equal sign or open door
thermometer/cloud
heart
Create better places (BP)
address poor air quality google pin/ tree/sunshine

Support sustainable and inclusive economic
port sustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG)
ble equality and improve accessibility (EA)
dress poor air quality and take action against climate change (CC)
£ or graph of arrows increasing
equal sign or open door
thermometer/cloud

growth
tribute to better health, wellbeing, safety and security (H) heart
ate better places (BP) google pin/ tree/sunshine

h (EG) £ or graph of arrows increasing
equal sign or open door
imate change (CC)
security (H)
thermometer/cloud
heart
google pin/ tree/sunshine
Enable equality and improve accessibility

or graph of arrows increasing
ual sign or open door
Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety
and security
ermometer/cloud
art
ogle pin/ tree/sunshine

Create better places

4
March 2020

Climate Change –
the challenge ahead
Making a difference disaster. The Panel concludes we will require rapid,
far reaching and unprecedented changes in all
We have seen significant improvements in aspects of society to avoid this. This is especially
transport since our first Joint Local Transport Plan true for the transport sector which, at 32%, is the
(JLTP) back in 2006. largest single source of carbon emissions in the
South West. For the West of England transport CO2
The arrival of metrobus and the Greater Bristol
emissions will rise by a further 22% by 2036 if we
Bus Network has transformed bus services and
don’t act - increasing the risk of droughts, floods
bus patronage has grown, against a national trend
and extreme heat not just globally but also for the
of decline.
South West region. Consequently, all four local
The number of cycling trips has more than doubled authorities and the West of England Combined
thanks to transport packages in Bath and Weston- Authority have now declared climate emergencies.
super-Mare and investment through the Local
Sustainable Transport Fund, Cycling Ambition Encouraging modal shift
Grant and the Local Growth Fund, improving
cycling and walking infrastructure. The Local Our Joint Local Transport Plan aims to ensure
Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan will that transport is carbon neutral by 2030. To do
provide a prioritised list of improvements across this there has to be a substantial shift towards
the West of England. cleaner and greener and more sustainable
forms of transport. We will need to maximise
Rail passengers too have doubled in number since every opportunity and work in partnership with
2008. And looking ahead MetroWest, which will see sustainable transport organisations, bus and rail
new stations and reopened lines, is on the point of operators, to encourage and help people switch
delivery. from cars to cycling, walking and public transport.
Thanks to Go Ultra Low West and improved We know that for some people a car is essential
infrastructure, every year more and more car trips and is likely to remain so, maybe due to mobility
are made by electric vehicles. impairments, work patterns or the need to
Meanwhile work is starting on a transformational transport bulky or heavy items. For most people,
mass transit network for the West of England and however, the car is often seen as the most
we are embracing technology and how this will convenient personal choice. To encourage people
lead to new, innovative and low carbon ways to to move away from cars, we will need to provide
travel. transformational alternatives such as a new mass
transit network. This may not be enough, so we will
also consider ways to manage demand possibly
The challenge through congestion charging, emissions charging
All of this is good news, but we recognise the very and workplace parking levy-type schemes. Cities
real challenge of climate change, the emergency such as Oxford, Leicester and Birmingham are
we face and its impact on the health, safety and already actively looking at these to reduce demand
wellbeing of our residents and people around and overall carbon emissions. Revenue raised
the world. The United Nations Intergovernmental from demand management measures, which
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has warned that could be significant, would be re-invested in public
a rise in temperatures of just 1.5 degrees could transport, cycling and walking.
lead to ecological, environmental and humanitarian

5
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Climate Emergency – the challenge ahead continued

London of course already has a congestion • Exploring new ways to run and fund our
charging scheme, and Nottingham’s workplace transport networks to provide unprecedented
parking levy has raised over £61m since it was investment in cycling, walking and public
introduced in 2012, helping the city fund its second transport.
tram route.
• Promoting zero carbon development that does
not need to be retrofitted.
JLTP4 and ongoing review
In the meantime, regular reviews and progress
This Joint Local Transport Plan (JLTP4) sets out to reports will ensure the JLTP4 remains relevant and
decarbonise and promote and transform cleaner decisive.
and greener and sustainable forms of transport
– cycling, walking and public transport but it is
unlikely to be enough to be transport carbon JLTP4 and the Paris Agreement
neutral by 2030, but it is a good starting point. In line with and taking account of the Paris
To transform our region, we will need to be flexible, Agreement the JLTP4 is fully committed to
agile and brave in our approach to the climate reducing carbon. The JLTP4 has a significantly
emergency as technologies evolve and lifestyles positive role to play in meeting the UK’s
and future strategic and local development international obligations through providing a
planning change so the JLTP4 will not be set in well-connected and sustainable transport network
stone. For these reasons the JLTP4 will remain which accelerates the shift towards low carbon
under review. We will undertake an immediate trips, supporting sustainable development and
review which will include further work to build the take up of Ultra Low Emission Vehicles to
up the evidence base and establish what will be decarbonise transport. In many respects with the
required to reach the 2030 target and this will set commitment to be carbon neutral by 2030 the
the basis for the next JLTP. JLTP4 goes beyond the Paris Agreement. Looking
ahead the next JLTP as outlined above will serve to
The review will also include: strengthen this role. As described in the following
section Central Government will be expected to
• Reinventing public transport through mass play its role.
transit, smart ticketing and making it more user
friendly, convenient, safe, direct and attractive
linking key destinations to enable everyone to Government role
use it. The JLTP4 and its successor Plan will not be
• Rethinking how we use our existing transport able to achieve everything on their own. Central
corridors including reallocating more road Government will have an increasingly large
space to buses, pedestrians and cyclists. role to play on issues such as the price of fuel,
tightening emission standards, incentives to switch
• Demand management measures to influence to electric vehicles and funding for mass transit.
travel choice and raise revenue to reinvest in As an example the October 2019 IMF report ‘How
alternatives. to mitigate climate change’ concluded that of the
• First and last mile type solutions to provide a various mitigation strategies to reduce fossil fuel
linked-up transport network. CO2 emissions, carbon taxes levied on the supply
of fossil fuels are the most powerful and efficient

6
March 2020

because they allow firms and households to find JLTP4 and the Local Industrial
the lowest-cost ways of reducing energy use and
shifting toward cleaner alternatives. Only the
Strategy
Government can lead on carbon taxes. Launched in the summer of 2019 the West of
England’s Local Industrial Strategy sets the
As part of a coordinated programme we will lobby
region’s overall approach to how we will develop
and push central Government to play its part and
our regional economy through supporting
enable the legislation and funding necessary to
innovation, skills development, enhancing
deliver the JLTP.
productivity and infrastructure development. In
turn the JLTP4 sets out how we will develop
Where we want to be in 2036 transport in the region and address our priorities
to reduce energy demands, lower carbon emissions
By 2036 at the completion of the JLTP4 the West and address the climate emergency. Central to
of England will be a carbon neutral community our Local Industrial Strategy and the JLTP4 are
where walking and cycling are the preferred the objectives of clean and inclusive growth and
choice for shorter journeys, and the vast majority these are very much aligned to the United Nations’
of vehicles on the road are decarbonised and 17 Sustainable Development Goals alongside the
no longer powered by fossil fuels. People will other JLTP4 priorities for supporting sustainable
have the opportunity to move around the region economic growth, equality and accessibility,
using affordable, high quality and frequent public creating better places and embracing new
transport to access their jobs and leisure activities technology.
and for vehicles delivering goods. Public spaces
will be greener, cleaner, people focused places that
are no longer dominated by vehicles.
Ultimately our transport vison is:

‘Connecting people and
places for a vibrant,
inclusive and carbon
neutral West of England.’
Read on for how we aim to achieve this.

7
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Climate Emergency – the challenge ahead continued

8
March 2020

Section 1:
Setting the scene
aerospace, financial, nuclear and innovation.

The West of England In 2017, the West of England Combined Authority
(WECA) was formed to help support increasing
The West of England is a prosperous city region coordination of transport, housing and skills
with a population of 1.1 million and an economy across the area administered by Bath & North
worth over £35bn a year. The region is diverse, East Somerset Council, Bristol City Council and
with the vibrant densely populated cities of South Gloucestershire Council. It is a legal body
Bristol and Bath, complemented by surrounding that can make transport decisions at the combined
rural areas and towns. The region’s growth has authority level and receive devolved powers
exceeded the national average over the past 15 and resources. It is through the West of England
years, while population grew by nine per cent Joint Committee that WECA and North Somerset
between 2001 and 2011. Productivity is the highest Council make decisions at the West of England
of all city regions in England outside London. level. Central Government has devolved £30m per
The West of England is known across the UK and annum for 30 years to WECA, giving more local
further afield for its creativity and quality of life; it control and accountability over spending. The West
is recognised as one of the best places to live in of England authorities will continue to work closely
Britain. The region attracts students and visitors with partners, including the West of England Local
from across the globe who recognise the unique Enterprise Partnership.
cities and towns and top-performing universities. It
has a highly skilled and talented workforce, which
is attracted by the top-class job opportunities,
supporting the clusters of world-leading sectors
within or adjacent to the region including

South
Gloucestershire

Bristol

North
Somerset
Bath & North
East Somerset

9
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 1:
Setting the scene continued

Climate emergency Managing demand
As we set out at the front of the JLTP4 we need to We have already flagged that we need to change
recognise the very real challenge of climate change the way we travel. This will mean managing
with all four local authorities and WECA having demand and in turn this will mean new charges
declared climate change emergencies. Our aim is and restrictions. Tough measures that will need to
to ensure transport is carbon neutral by 2030. This be considered are:
is the opportunity for all of us, from individuals to
organisations, to take responsibility for and action
l Management of parking provision – on street, off
on reducing transport carbon emissions. Of course, street, residential and business parking
there is far more to declaring a climate change l Reallocation of road space to sustainable
emergency than just transport but taking action transport modes
will mean changing the way we all travel.
l Road user charging e.g. as applied in London
It is no longer enough for us to acknowledge with revenue reinvested in alternatives
the issue of climate change: we need to move
more quickly to respond to the challenge. It is l Workplace parking levy e.g. as applied in
no longer enough to expect everyone else to Nottingham with revenue reinvested in
change their behaviour or rely upon technology alternatives
to solve the issue. We must all start taking l City centre and town centre private vehicle bans
personal responsibility to tackle the effects of
climate change including how we decide to travel. The measures will raise revenue to reinvest in
In return we as the West of England authorities alternatives modes of transport.
will press the Government to provide us with the
tools, powers and resources to achieve our target There is nothing particularly new in these
of being carbon neutral by 2030. The policies and measures. They have all been successfully used,
initiatives set out in this plan enable and encourage often as individual measures, in many locations
the increased use of sustainable and active modes across the world but what is shifting is the scale of
of travel. intervention required to address climate change.
Many of these measures are likely to divide
opinion, and decisions must be bold to achieve the
step change required by 2030. The purpose of the
JLTP4 is to provide the actions, interventions and
policy framework for local decisions.
More detail on how we propose to manage demand
can be found in Section 7: Connectivity within the
West of England.

10
March 2020

Joint Transport Local Industrial Strategy
Study The West of England Local Industrial Strategy
A Joint Transport Study looks at how we need to work together to secure
(JTS) was undertaken to clean growth to benefit all residents.
recommend how to address Launched in summer 2019, it was developed by
both current transport the West of England Combined Authority and Local
challenges, including Enterprise Partnership, working with regional
carbon reduction, and businesses and organisations, as well as central
forecast growth. The JTS, Government.
developed in partnership
with Highways England, identified potential future To ensure continued success for the region, four
strategic transport proposals for delivery up to key priorities are identified in the strategy:
2036, that address current challenges and inform
future development proposals for local and
l Investing in infrastructure that reduces energy
regional plans. demand, lowers carbon emissions and is
resilient to the impacts of climate change.
Future strategic planning will set out a prospectus
for sustainable growth to help the region meet its
l Strengthening innovation and driving
housing and transport needs. It will include the productivity
policies and principles required to support the l Supporting all residents to contribute to and
delivery of new homes and jobs. Local Plans for benefit from economic success
each authority contain the more detailed plans and
policies for new development, including parking. l Providing businesses with the space, networks
and skills they need to boost productivity, grow
The JTS set out the following approach for and thrive
transport:
These priorities align well with the JLTP4
“Transport in the West of England will be objectives for addressing climate change,
transformed over the next 20 years through a supporting sustainable economic growth, equality
programme of complementary measures designed and accessibility and creating better places and the
to address underlying challenges and to enable commitment for embracing new technology (see
the sustainable delivery of new housing and Section 4).
employment growth.”
The JTS has informed and has been informed Sustainable Development Goals
by local and regional plans. The findings and
recommendations in the JTS were advisory; this Complementing the Local Industrial Strategy are
Joint Local Transport Plan takes account of these the 17 United Nations Sustainable Development
findings, builds upon them and formalises the work Goals (SDG) which aim by 2030 to address
previously carried out. challenges related to poverty, inequality,
environment, prosperity, climate action and peace
and justice.
Although transport may not have a direct impact
on every goal, there are indirect ways that most of

11
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 1:
Setting the scene continued

the 17 goals can be met through implementing the income. However, most transport funding comes
measures of the JLTP4 including creating better from the Department for Transport (DfT) and other
places and supporting sustainable and inclusive arms of central Government.
economic growth. Indirectly, other goals are
positively benefitted, such as life on land and life Department for Transport
below water, through consideration of species in The Department for Transport (DfT) is responsible
our Habitats Regulations Assessment. for allocating funding to transport schemes. In
recent years, the level of regular annual funding
Transport in the West of England that local authorities receive from DfT for capital
Transport in the West of England is planned, transport projects and highway maintenance has
managed, delivered and funded by a large group been reducing. Funding is increasingly awarded
of organisations, shown in Figure 1.1, working through competitive bids, such as the Highways
together to improve transport provision and Maintenance Challenge Fund and Cycle Ambition
support our commitment to carbon reduction. Fund, and these can only be used for specific
purposes. This shift to competitive bids means
Figure 1.1: Transport in the West of England central Government achieves greater control,
accountability, and stronger value for money.
Local authorities However, it has led to more uncertain levels of
and WECA
funding for local authorities.
Other organisations
e.g. Bristol Airport
Department Local Enterprise Partnership
for Transport
and Port
The West of England Local Enterprise Partnership
(LEP) supports business growth and is working
Bus operators
Transport Local
Enterprise to attract new jobs to Bristol, Bath, Weston-
in the West Partnership
super-Mare and the rest of the region. The LEP,
of England which is accountable to WECA, brings together
Network Rail Sub-National organisations from the private, public (including
Transport Bodies
and TOCs
the four local authorities), education/training and
social enterprise sectors, to support the delivery
Highways
England
People
who travel
of the West of England Industrial Strategy. We
will also work with the cross border Western
Gateway powerhouse covering Bristol, Bath,
Gloucestershire, Swindon, Cardiff, Newport and
Swansea.
Local authorities and WECA
Local authorities are responsible for delivering Sub-National Transport Bodies
local transport schemes. They also work together, The Western Gateway Sub-National Transport
through bodies such as WECA, on the development Body (SNTB) made up of WECA, North Somerset,
of cross-cutting strategies for the West of England Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole,
and delivery of larger schemes, including metrobus Gloucestershire County, Dorset and Wiltshire
and MetroWest. Local authorities receive regular councils aims to provide more strategic thinking
annual transport funding from local sources, about transport investment priorities to improve
including Council Tax, business rates and parking regional productivity and sustainable economic

12
March 2020

growth. The Western Gateway is not a statutory local communities, where there is a social or
body. accessibility need and it is not viable to run a
commercial service.
Five broad strategic transport corridors and three
interchanges have been identified where enhanced Other organisations
connectivity will generate a range of economic A range of other organisations are involved in
benefits, including much-needed productivity gains, delivering transport improvements. This includes
employment and Gross Value Added (GVA). The Bristol Airport and Port, housing and employment
Western Gateway is strategically located so that developers, walking and cycling charities and
many of the corridors provide connectivity to the external stakeholders. Further details on how
neighbouring SNTBs of the Peninsula, England’s we will continue to embrace these and other
Economic Heartland and Transport for the South partnerships are set out in Section 4.
East. A new Western Gateway rail strategy is under
development.
Local Transport Plans
Highways England
Local authorities have historically been required
Highways England is responsible for the Strategic by Government to prepare LTPs; this plan is the
Road Network (SRN), which comprises of fourth prepared by the authorities in the West of
motorways and major A roads. Highways England England. In the past, LTPs would set out transport
receives funding from central Government and improvements the local authority had identified
sets out its investment priorities in five-year Road as required, and these would be reviewed by DfT.
Investment Strategies (RIS). The development of Based on the review, funding for core schemes
RIS considers local needs for improvements to the would be allocated, with major schemes (those
SRN, such as new motorway junctions. over £5m) funded through a separate bidding
Network Rail and train operating companies process.
(TOCs) The recent shift to most transport funding coming
Network Rail is responsible for the rail tracks, from bids means LTPs are now more aspirational
signalling and other rail infrastructure, including documents that are increasingly used as bidding
tools. Local authorities can set out a programme
Bristol Temple Meads station they would like to deliver, and in addition to regular
Train operating companies, such as Great Western funding, they can still apply to DfT for larger
Railway, operate the trains and most stations. Like sums of money to deliver major schemes (for
Highways England, Network Rail produces a five- further information see Section 10: Funding and
year investment strategy, that takes into account Implementation).
strategic projects, such as electrification, and
locally promoted projects, such as MetroWest.

Bus operators
Most buses in the West of England are run on a
commercial basis by bus operating companies,
such as First. They are responsible for setting
routes, fares and timetables, and work with local
authorities to improve services. Local authorities
also subsidise a small number of services for

13
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 1:
Setting the scene continued

Achievements during the Joint Local Transport l Completion of the Bath Transportation Package,
Plan 3 period including expansion to the capacity of Park
The West of England Joint Local Transport Plan & Ride, improvements to the city’s bus stop
(JLTP3), prepared in 2011, set out a 15-year vision infrastructure and reconfiguration of parts of the
for transport across the region. It focussed on city’s road network
reducing carbon emissions, supporting economic l Completion of the A4174 South Bristol Link, a
growth, and improving accessibility, safety and key multimodal transport link connecting South
security, health, and the quality of life. The region Bristol with North Somerset at Ashton Vale,
has made significant achievements during the improving links between the M5 motorway,
seven years of JLTP3 spending over £500m on the Bristol International Airport and the A38, and
delivery of transport projects, including: removing freight vehicles from Winterstoke Road
l Step change improvements to the Greater Additionally, on the rail network, delivery continues
Bristol Bus Network, including vehicle quality, of the Great Western electrification project and new
information, service frequency and fare bi-mode intercity trains, bringing faster journey
structures times and more services linking the region with
l The launch of the first three metrobus routes, London. Work is also progressing on MetroWest,
providing a significant increase in the quality and which focuses on major improvements to local and
speed of public transport along over 50km of suburban rail services, including the re-introduction
routes, linking central Bristol with areas of North of passenger services between Portishead, Pill,
Somerset and South Gloucestershire Henbury and Bristol.

l Successful bid with bus operators for These and other projects have contributed to very
designation of key bus route corridors as a positive changes in how people get around the
Better Bus Area to target specific improvements region. During the past ten years we have seen:
funded by displaced Bus Service Operators’ l The number of bicycle trips more than double,
Grant with an average year on year increase of 10%
l Programmes to facilitate travel behaviour l The number of bus passenger journeys
change and increase cycle and bus use, increasing by more than one third – with 10-15%
delivered under the Local Sustainable Transport alone across much of the region in the year to
Fund, Access WEST, Better Bus Area Fund, 2016/17, compared to a fall of nearly 1% across
Cycling Ambition Grant and Local Growth Fund England as a whole. Bus passenger satisfaction
l Large areas of public realm improvements to has remained stable in recent years with overall
improve conditions for pedestrian and cyclists bus satisfaction levels standing at 89% in the
and remove the dominance of vehicular traffic, 2017, which is higher than in most core city
including Weston-super-Mare town centre and regions
The Cenotaph in Bristol l Rail passengers (since 2008) increasing by more
l Completion of the Weston-super-Mare transport than half, with more than double the number
package, including improvements to M5 Junction using the Severn Beach Line
21 and the Worle Parkway station interchange We exceeded the targets set out in JLTP3 in all
these areas, along with those relating to improving
road safety and reducing CO2 emissions.

14
March 2020

Whilst the JLTP4 contains much that is new and health. The SEA process aims to make decision-
exciting it will continue the work of its predecessor makers aware of the likely positive and negative
plans. Small and medium sized schemes to environmental effects of policies and plans at an
promote cycling, walking, road safety and public early stage of development.
transport will remain a key part of the JLTP4.
The SEA does not provide a detailed assessment
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 (2020-2036) of the schemes listed within JLTP4 but includes a
This Joint Local Transport Plan (JLTP) has been broad assessment of the likely effects of the overall
prepared by WECA and the four West of England plan. It also considers the impact of adopting
local authorities – Bath & North East Somerset and implementing JLTP4 compared to the likely
Council, Bristol City Council, North Somerset impact of any reasonable alternative scenarios.
Council, and South Gloucestershire Council. It takes The likely impacts of the plan and the reasonable
account of the JTS findings and recommendations alternatives are identified, described and evaluated.
and will support delivery of the more detailed The reasonable alternative scenarios considered as
interventions set out in local transport strategies part of this JLTP4 assessment, are:
across the region. This includes the Bath and l JLTP3 remains the adopted transport policy for
Bristol Transport Strategies, and other supporting the West of England, and none of the transport
strategies for cycling, parking and other modes. policies included in JLTP3 are updated.
The JLTP4 will also be supported by other regional
strategies covering cycling, walking, buses, the l ‘No Plan’ option, which assumes there is no
Major Road Network and the Key Route Network JLTP4 and JLTP3 ceases to be in place. This
(KRN). The JLTP is fundamental in supporting the means the JLTP3 policies will no longer apply,
West of England Energy Strategy, along with local but schemes directly mitigating development
clean air strategies, as part of achieving carbon locations, and individual local authority
reduction. Future strategic planning will mainly be transport policies, will continue to exist.
delivered by the Local Plans and Supplementary An Environmental Report has been prepared
Planning Documents (SPDs), which include for JLTP4, providing an assessment of “the
parking standards for the public highway and new likely significant effects on the environment”.
development, including housing and offices. Both The Environmental Report includes a Habitats
WECA and the local authorities will put together Regulations Assessment, Equalities Impact
their capital programmes for major scheme Assessment and Health Impact Assessment. The
delivery. Environmental Report was consulted upon at the
The relationship of the JLTP4 to other plans same time as the consultation version of JLTP4.
is shown in Figure 1.2 overleaf. The following A summary of the draft Environmental Report is
section identifies the challenges JLTP4 will need to included in Appendix 1.
respond to over the next 20 years. The SEA seeks to identify measures that can be
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) integrated into JLTP4 to ensure that likely adverse
environmental impacts of the plan are minimised
The European SEA Directive (2001/42/EC) requires and mitigated. The mitigations included in the
an environmental assessment to be undertaken of Environmental Report, and the feedback obtained
any plans or policies that could result in an impact during the consultation period, were considered
on the environment. The overall aim is to ensure and used to inform the final version of JLTP4.
better protection for the environment and human

15
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 1:
Setting the scene continued

Figure 1.2: Relationship of JLTP4 to other plans

National Government Policies, e.g. National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF),
Department for Transport policies

Strategic (West of England)
Regional supporting strategies,
Future spatial including:
strategy and Local Joint Local Transport • Key Route Network Strategy
Industrial Strategy Plan (JLTP4) • Climate Change Action Plan
• Local Cycling & Walking
Infrastructure Plan
Joint Future • Bus Strategy
Transport spatial
Study (JTS) planning • Energy Strategy
• Local clean air strategies
• Strategic Environmental
Spatial Assessment
strategy JLTP4 • Network Rail & Highways
HRA HRA England regional strategies
• Ultra Low Emission Vehicle
Strategy
• Freight strategy
Joint Green • Cross boundary area specific
Infrastructure masterplanning/strategies
Strategy

Local
Local (Unitary Authority level) Plan KEY
HRA
Informs

Local Plans (by each
unitary authority) Strategic Technical
policy studies
documents

Local access Major transport
strategies & programme HRA Habitats
infrastructure plans Regulations Local policy
Assessments documents

Major
Supporting transport
Major transport strategies programme
programmes delivery

16
March 2020

Joint Green Infrastructure Strategy Answering the consultation questionnaire, 79% of
Transport can make a positive contribution to people agreed with the challenges identified, 65%
the natural environment by integrating green agreed with the JLTP4’s vision and objectives,
infrastructure into scheme design. Green indicated a broad acceptance of the core principles
infrastructure is a strategically planned and of the plan. At 56%, fewer people agreed with the
managed network of natural and semi-natural approach to improving the region’s connectivity,
areas, delivering multiple benefits for people, but still indicated that an overall majority agree
wildlife and the environment. The West of with the approach. Responding to this feedback, we
England’s emerging Joint Green Infrastructure have strengthened plans for connectivity and set
Strategy (JGIS) provides an evidence base for regional targets for modal share, bus passenger
Local Plan development as well as other plans and satisfaction, and congestion and road safety (see
strategies; tools to enable a consistent approach Section 12: targets, indicators, and monitoring).
to green infrastructure across the four authorities; With the online Transport Priority Simulator, the
and identifies opportunities for enhancement and most popular priorities for transport spending
improved connectivity of green infrastructure. were: reallocating highway space (to public
Transport schemes designed from the outset with transport/cycling/walking), new and improved
strong green infrastructure principles including rail services, creating a comprehensive and safe
establishment and maintenance considerations network to support active travel for shorter
and costs have the potential to deliver significant trips and constructing a mass transit network.
benefits including biodiversity net gain, carbon Responding to this feedback, JLTP4 has been
capture, sustainable drainage systems, air quality, amended to place greater emphasis on the
improvement to health and wellbeing through highway space required for cycling, walking
improving access to green spaces via active travel and public transport (see Section 4: Embracing
routes and building resilience against climate technology and partnerships). We have also made
change. significant progress with our plans to reopen
The further development of Green Infrastructure the Portishead railway line (Metrowest Phase 1)
Plans at an authority level will also reflect schemes which will upgrade the existing train service at 16
contained within this JLTP4. This approach stations across three rail corridors. We have also
helps achieve objective 5 (SEAO5) of the JLTP4’s published and consulted on the draft Local Cycling
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA): to and Walking Infrastructure Plan to support the
‘protect and enhance biodiversity and ecological creation of a comprehensive and safe network for
networks. active travel.
In the free text comments, some people used the
Public consultation opportunity to highlight concerns about specific
schemes. The alignment and locations of schemes
Public consultation on the draft JLTP4 was shown on this plan are purely indicative. Any
undertaken from 6 February to 20 March 2019. schemes identified in JLTP4 would be subject to
We wanted to ensure that as many people further feasibility work and consultation, with most
as possible had a chance to respond to the requiring planning permission.
consultation on the document. Over the course of
the consultation, social media activity exceeded For further information, please see the JLTP4
over half a million views and we received consultation report in Appendix 5.
approximately 4,200 responses.

17
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 1:
Setting the scene continued

Updating and reviewing the JLTP4
In the light of climate emergency declarations,
the need to take significant action, and potential
changes to future strategic planning the JLTP4 will
undergo immediate review.
We will undertake further work to build up the
evidence base and establish what will be required
to reach the 2030 target and this will set the basis
for the next JLTP. This could include:
l Reinventing public transport through mass
transit, smart ticketing and making it more user
friendly, convenient, safe, direct and attractive
linking key destinations to enable everyone to
use it.
l Rethinking how we use our existing transport
corridors including reallocating more and more
road space to buses, pedestrians and cyclists.
l Demand management measures to influence
travel choice and raise revenue to reinvest in
alternatives.
l First and last mile type solutions to provide a
joined-up transport network.
l Exploring new ways to run and fund our
transport networks to provide unprecedented
investment in cycling, walking and public
transport.
l Promoting zero carbon development that does
not need to be retrofitted.
In the meantime regular reviews and progress
reports will ensure the JLTP4 remains relevant and
decisive, flexible and agile.

18
March 2020

Section 2: Transport challenges in the
West of England
There have been significant achievements during growth to occur sustainably and be carbon
the last seven years of JLTP3. Investment has neutral, connectivity across the region needs to be
contributed towards changes in how people get transformed. We are faced with ongoing and new
around the region, resulting in increased bus challenges, many of which such as climate change
passenger numbers, increased levels of walking are not unique to the West of England, and some of
and cycling, improved road safety and reduced which we have little or no control over. This section
CO2 emissions. However, the West of England
NO2which will
faces serious transport challenges,
become more acute with the anticipated scale of
£
sets out some of the key challenges faced. A high-
level summary is shown in Figure 2.1.

growth in the area. For population and economic

Figure 2.1: High-level summary of transport challenges

NO2 £
2 of 3 commutes by car Over 300 premature Ageing population:
deaths a year linked 1 in 5 over 65 years old

25% to NO2

increase in trips by 2036
£ 2 in 5 commutes are
£6bn shortfall 1 in 11 commutes
by public transport
less than 2km
in transport funding

NO2
NO
NO2
2
£
£300m
££
annual cost of congestion

Transport is the largest
contributor to greenhouse
Population growth gas and CO2 emissions
2016: 1.1m people
2036: 1.3m people

19
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 2:
Transport challenges in the West of England continued

Climate change – It reports that CO2 emissions public transport. With significant
must be cut drastically by 45% population changes, however,
transport is the largest of 2010 levels by 2030 and ‘net this trend could reverse without
contributor to carbon zero’ levels achieved by 2050. significant intervention and we
dioxide emissions in the will have to take major action to
This means that alongside
West of England technology to reduce emissions,
hit that 2030 target.
Transport is responsible for such as electric cars, significant As later sections in the JLTP4
32% of carbon dioxide (CO2) advances are required in will expand upon we will address
emissions in the West of technology that can remove CO2 climate change by:
England, compared to 26% from the atmosphere. In 2017 the
Government announced plans
l Providing a well-connected
nationally. Climate change
to ban the sale of new diesel and sustainable transport
impacts on the resilience and
and petrol cars by 2040, with network to accelerate the shift
standard of the transport
all fossil fuel powered vehicles towards low carbon trips
network, including issues such
as flooding, landslides, potholes, banned entirely by 2050. l Supporting sustainable
heat damage to roads and rail development
As mentioned in Section 1 the
buckling. The JLTP4, future
four local authorities and WECA l Supporting the take up of
strategic planning and
have declared climate change Ultra Low Emission Vehicles
West of England Energy Strategy emergencies with the aim to be to decarbonise transport
will be key levers in supporting carbon neutral by 2030. Over
the UK commitment to the Paris the last decade a reduction in l Embracing new technology
Agreement, negotiated at the transport emissions has been to provide new travel options
2015 United Nations Framework achieved through improved for people and ways of
Convention on Climate Change. fuel efficiency and some mode transporting goods
shift to walking, cycling and
This aims to limit the increase
in global average temperatures
to 1.5°C by 2050. The Climate
Change Act is a legally binding
Current carbon dioxide emissions, by sector, in the West of England
commitment by the UK
Government to achieve an 80%
reduction in CO2 emissions by Road transport (A roads) 14%
2050 from a 1990 baseline. Road transport (minor roads) 18%
Transport other 0%
In October 2018, the United
Industrial and commercial electricity 16%
Nation’s Intergovernmental
Industrial and commercial gas 10%
Panel on Climate Change
Industrial and commercial other fuels 5%
published a report saying the
Domestic electricity 11%
world is off track to keep to
Domestic gas 23%
the 1.5°C limit and would likely
Domestic other fuels 2%
exceed it by around 2040, even
Agriculture 1%
with the promises made as part •
of the Paris Agreement.

20
March 2020

l Implementing demand And globally:
management measures to
encourage a modal shift
l Higher temperatures -
to more sustainable forms almost 400 all-time high
of travel and reinvest the temperatures were set in the
revenue in public transport, northern hemisphere over the
cycling and walking summer of 2019 with records
broken in 29 countries
l Local authorities leading the
way as public organisations
l More droughts and flooding
by encouraging their own l More extreme weather events
staff and operations to use
sustainable forms of transport l Retreating ice sheets - Arctic,
Antarctic and Greenland
If we don’t deliver on these
actions the most likely local l Gulf stream continues to
outcomes by 2036 are: slow – 15% drop since the mid
twentieth century
l CO2 emissions up 22%
l Areas on Earth that are no
l Congestion costs £800m a longer habitable by people
year
l Delays up 40% Travel demand is
Vehicle trips up 26% growing, and there is
2 in 5 commuting
l
an increased need to
Time spent queuing in traffic
l
74%
improve the offer of car journeys less
more sustainable modes
l Journey time up 9% of transport than 2km
And nationally: The demand for travel to and
l Summer temperatures in the within the West of England is
UK will regularly reach 38.5°C growing, and will continue to
by the 2040s grow, due to forecast housing
and employment growth. This
l Heat related deaths in the UK will put increasing pressure
projected to rise from 2,000 on the already congested
a year at present to 7,000 by transport network. Changing
2050 travel patterns, due to the
layout and location of more
l Heavier rainfall impact on
recent developments, flexible
drainage and sewage systems
working and the increasing
especially in urban areas
availability of technology and
telecommunications, will have
some impact on transport

21
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 2:
Transport challenges in the West of England continued

growth, but if left unchecked People who do not use public unchecked. The removal of the
there is still going to be an over- transport have the perception Severn Bridge tolls is likely
dependence on the private car, there are limited travel options, to have worsened congestion
particularly for some very short hence the level of satisfaction on some major roads in the
journeys. with public transport journey West of England. Additionally,
planning information is lower the efficiency of the region’s
The common perception than the national average. network is impacted by different
highway network management
is that there are limited arrangements.
travel options Parts of the road and
rail networks are under There is a need to sustainably
There can be limitations to public strain accommodate growth in the
transport connectivity resulting number of delivery and freight
from the delivery of bus services The lack of spare highway vehicles. These are generated
by a deregulated, commercial capacity impacts on providing by the airport and port, both
market, and delivery of rail resilience, for example for of which have aspirations to
services by franchisees working diversionary routes following expand, and other road freight
to the specification set by DfT. an incident on the motorway movements into and through
network. Congestion and the region, associated with the
Whilst the number of passengers unreliability are a major cost growing economy, population
has increased, public transport to the region, estimated to be and home shopping.
use is still low compared to equivalent to £300m per year,
some other city regions. Many due to increased vehicle operator The local authorities work hard
journeys are across or around costs and non-productive time, to maintain their highway assets.
urban areas instead of to town which are barriers to further However, budget constraints
and city centres, and travel clustering of business sectors mean there is a highway
options tend to be more limited in Enterprise Areas/Zones maintenance backlog. There is an
or slower. Some rail services and other major employment increasing incidence of poor or
are still impacted by the age areas. This will impact on our dangerous road surfaces, often
and low capacity of rolling stock, sustainable growth aspirations arising from extreme weather
infrastructure problems and rail and competitiveness if left events.
company staff shortages.

1 in 11 commutes by public transport

22
March 2020

Demand is growing on the local Transport impacts on High car dependency, poor air
and regional rail network, and quality and inactive lifestyles
trains are overcrowded at peak
safety, security, air pose a major threat to public
times, particularly into Bristol quality, public health health. The quality of the public
and Bath. and public realm realm and green spaces are poor
in some areas, and severance
Vulnerable road users
There are high levels of and noise caused by motorised
(particularly pedestrians, cyclists
traffic exacerbates this and
inequality and different and motorcyclists) continue
deters the use of active modes.
accessibility needs to be more seriously affected
As well as impacting on physical
by road traffic incidents with
health, it limits the integration
There are high levels of motorcyclists disproportionately
and vitality of local communities
inequality across the West of affected. Many streets are
and negatively affects quality of
England, with some communities perceived to have safety or
life
or individuals not benefiting security issues, including high
from the prosperity of the numbers of heavy vehicles.
region but impacted by the high There is a need to
This makes walking or cycling
costs of living. The pockets of
unappealing and can increase
manage emerging
deprivation, and their historic technology and
lack of investment in transport vehicle trips, such as on the
improvements, impact on ‘school run’, thereby creating a innovation
opportunities to access services vicious circle.
We may be at the tipping point
and employment. One equality Road traffic is a major of a revolution in transport,
impact is that women are less contributor to both urban and as emerging technologies and
likely to have access to a car global air pollution. Exposure innovation, including ‘driverless’
than men and more likely to to transport-related air electric vehicles and smartphone
have more complex travel pollution has been associated apps, change how we choose
patterns that are not easy to with adverse health impacts to travel. We need to consider
undertake, especially in areas of on local communities and the the potential for, and long-term
poor connectivity. There is also natural environment. Air Quality impacts of this on mobility and
an ageing population which has Management Areas (AQMAs) travel (see Section 4: Embracing
its own distinct travel needs. continue to be in place in areas technology and partnerships for
Older people rely increasingly including Bath, Bristol and other more details).
on others to gain access to locations on major roads with
services, especially in rural areas heavy and/or slow- moving
where local facilities and public traffic. The Government has
transport are lacking or limited. directed local authorities to
prepare Clean Air Plans to
reduce nitrogen dioxide (NO2)
levels in the Bath and Bristol
urban areas to legal levels,
which can include implementing
Clean Air Zones (CAZs).

23
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 2:
Transport challenges in the West of England continued

There has been limited Public spending (£) on transport per resident (2016/17)
transport funding London
Many of the challenges are a direct Yorkshire and The Humber
result of limited transport funding
across the region and wider South North West
West for many years; the level
of available resources has been South East
insufficient to address the scale East of England
of growth. During the five-year
period from 2012/13 to 2016/17, the West Midlands
average overall public spending on
transport per resident of the South North East
West region was around £1,150, the
South West
lowest across all regions except
for the East Midlands. The average East Midlands
spend across England (excluding
London) was nearly 20% higher, 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
at £1,370. Furthermore, during the
same period, the South West saw
Public spending (£) on transport per £1000 GVA (2016/17)
the lowest average overall public
spend per Gross Value Added (GVA) London
on transport, at £49.76 per £1000
GVA. This compares to an average Yorkshire and The Humber
in England, excluding London, of
£58.48 per £1000 GVA. The JLTP4 North West
recognises the need to catch- North East
up through the most ambitious
transport programme ever for the West Midlands
West of England.
East of England
The following sections of the JLTP4
set out how we will continue to East Midlands
work together to build on our South East
achievements to date, provide the
step change in transport provision South West
that is required, and embrace new
opportunities and technology to 0 20 40 60 80 100
provide enhanced connectivity
across and beyond the West of
England. This will ensure the West
of England continues to be one of
the best places to live, study work
and visit.

24
March 2020

Section 3:
Vision and objectives
Vision Outcomes
The long-term aspiration for transport in the West For each of the objectives, several outcomes have
of England is encompassed in the vision for JLTP4: been agreed. These outcomes set out what we
are seeking to achieve by delivering the plan.
‘Connecting people and The policies included in the plan will support the
delivery of the objectives and outcomes.
places for a vibrant,
To demonstrate how the JLTP4 policies contribute
inclusive and carbon neutral towards delivering the objectives and outcomes,
West of England’ a series of icons have been developed. There is
one icon for each objective, with the numbers
Objectives underneath showing the outcomes the policy is
likely to make the largest contribution towards
Five objectives have been identified, based on the achieving. The icons are included next to each
Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG) £ or graph of arrows increasing

aspirations of the West of England authorities and
Enable equality and improve accessibility (EA) equal sign or open door

policy in the connectivity sections.
Address poor air quality and take action against climate change (CC) thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety and security (H) heart
Create better places (BP) google pin/ tree/sunshine

previous plans and policies prepared. There is no
priority allocated to the objectives as they all have Take action against climate and address poor
a role to play in achieving the vision for the West air quality
of England. The objectives, as follows, are in no
ustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG) £ or graph of arrows increasing
uality and improve accessibility (EA) equal sign or open door
thermometer/cloud

1. Reduce carbon emissions to net zero by 2030
poor air quality and take action against climate change (CC)
e to better health, wellbeing, safety and security (H) heart

particular order:
tter places (BP) google pin/ tree/sunshine
Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG) £ or graph of arrows increasing
Enable equality and improve accessibility (EA) equal sign or open door
Address poor air quality and take action against climate change (CC) thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety and security (H)
Create better places (BP)
heart
google pin/ tree/sunshine 2. NOx, particulates and carbon emissions are
Take action against climate change and reduced
address poor air quality
Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG) £ or graph of arrows increasing 3. Air quality in the AQMAs is improved
Support sustainable and inclusive economic
Enable equality and improve accessibility (EA) equal sign or open door
Address poor air quality and take action against climate change (CC) thermometer/cloud

4. Air quality remains better than national
Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety and security (H) heart
Create better places (BP) google pin/ tree/sunshine

omic growth (EG)
growth
£ or graph of arrows increasing

standards outside the AQMAs
ty (EA) equal sign or open door
n against climate change (CC) thermometer/cloud
safety and security (H) heart
google pin/ tree/sunshine

Enable equality and improve accessibility 5. The transport network is resilient and
£ or graph of arrows increasing

e (CC)
equal sign or open door
thermometer/cloud
heart
google pin/ tree/sunshine
Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety adaptable
and security 6. Technological advances to improve air quality
Create better places and monitoring are embraced

25
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 3:
Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG)
Enable equality and improve accessibility (EA)
£ or graph of arrows increasing
equal sign or open door

Vision and objectives continued
Address poor air quality and take action against climate change (CC) thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety and security (H) heart
Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG) £ or graph of arrows increasing
Create better places (BP) google pin/ tree/sunshine Enable equality and improve accessibility (EA) equal sign or open door
Address poor air quality and take action against climate change (CC) thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety and security (H) heart
Create better places (BP) google pin/ tree/sunshine

Support sustainable and inclusive Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety
economic growth and security
1. Improved efficiency and reliability on local, 1. There is a step change in the number of
national and international transport networks healthy, low carbon walking and cycling trips
2. Delivery of new housing and jobs is 2. There is a continued reduction in the number
supported of road casualties on the transport network
3. Access opportunities to employment growth 3. Road safety for transport users is improved,
areas and education is provided for all particularly for those most at risk
4. Transport assets are maintained and 4. Personal safety on the transport network is
managed, and demonstrate value for money Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG)
Enable equality and improve accessibility (EA)
£ or graph of arrows increasing
equal sign or open door
improved, and there is less crime and fear of
crime
Address poor air quality and take action against climate change (CC) thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety and security (H) heart

5. The high-quality transport network generates Create better places (BP) google pin/ tree/sunshine

inward investment
6. Congestion and demand on the network Create better places
is better managed through technological
port sustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG)
ble equality and improve accessibility (EA)
£ or graph of arrows increasing
equal sign or open door
1. Journey experience is enhanced through an
advances integrated and connected transport network
ress poor air quality and take action against climate change (CC) thermometer/cloud
tribute to better health, wellbeing, safety and security (H) heart
ate better places (BP) google pin/ tree/sunshine

2. The impact of the transport network on the
Enable equality and improve accessibility built, natural and historic environment is
1. Connectivity is increased and transformed, minimised
enabling seamless “door-to-door” movements 3. Streetscape, public spaces and urban
of people and goods environments are enhanced
2. Access for those with both visible and hidden 4. The transport network supports
disabilities is improved neighbourhood renewal and the regeneration
3. Access to services and opportunities for of deprived areas
residents in rural, remote and deprived areas
is improved
4. Better information to aid travel decisions is
provided
5. Low carbon transport and opportunities for
reducing the need to travel are maximised
6. New public transport systems, smarter
ticketing and faster payment options are
enabled

26
March 2020

Where we need to be in 2030 And where we will go next
To achieve carbon neutral transport by 2030 Significant changes are taking place in society and
requires a substantial modal shift away from mobility as the digital age has collided with, and
cars to public transport, cycling and walking. It is is disrupting, the motor age. Social, technological,
likely that a significant daily road pricing charge economic, environmental and political drivers
with revenue reinvested in alternatives, and the are at play, creating deep uncertainty over what
return of the fuel tax escalator alongside further the future might look like. We want the West of
engine efficiency improvements will be needed to England to be a world leader in transport provision.
decarbonise transport (see Section 11 and Modal We want to be at the forefront of technology not
Target Shift). just ready for technology change but actively
pursuing, planning and harnessing it and in the
Where we want to be in 2036 process pushing central Government to enable the
legislation and provide the funding necessary to
By 2036 at the completion of the JLTP4 the West realise this level of ambition.
of England will be a carbon neutral community
where the vast majority of vehicles on the road are
decarbonised and no longer fuelled by fossil fuels.
More people will have the opportunity to move
around the region using affordable, high quality
and frequent public transport accessing their
jobs and leisure activities and delivering freight.
People’s choice of mode will be reflected by the
real cost in environmental terms and consequently
our streets and roads will no longer be dominated
by the private car. More of us will cycle and
walk short distances more frequently rather
than deciding to travel by car. Some of us will be
travelling by connected and autonomous vehicles
whilst overall the number and distance of journeys
to work will decrease as more of us choose to work
from home.

27
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 3:
Vision and objectives continued

28
March 2020

Section 4: Embracing technology and
partnerships
Technological advances and accessible transport option for all. However, if CAVs
innovation start to compete financially with public transport
this may result in people shifting away from public
Technological advances and innovation are striding transport to cars, which would lead to an increase
ahead at the global level, with new digital systems in the number of vehicles on the road network.
and devices becoming an increasingly important The introduction of CAVs may also mean that some
part of our daily lives. The huge rise in internet people opt to commute further for work due to
shopping, more flexible working patterns and their ability to work while traveling, again resulting
use of telecommunications software, are leading in more vehicles on the road. Within this JLTP4
to fewer journeys being made per person for period, CAVs will only provide part of the solution,
shopping, commuting and business. Technology and a multimodal approach will still be needed.
has had a significant impact on mobility, and this
will continue. Mobility as a Service (MaaS), including Pay As
You Go travel, could encourage a shift away from
Future mobility is about so much more than personally-owned modes of transport and towards
technology; it’s about people, connectivity and the solutions that are consumed as a service. This
way we create and support change to deliver the could include the concept of paying for a weekly
future we want. People often adapt well to change, travel pass that includes bike hire, car hire, bus
but opportunities need to be provided in the right and train travel, rather than owning a personal
place and at the right time to maximise benefits. As mode of transport.
such, by shaping future mobility systems, we can,
in turn, shape demand. Open data, stemming from data collation and
sharing of information obtained from journey
The right schemes and policy framework need planning tools and ticket sales, for example, can
to be in place to capitalise on changes, enable provide an understanding of travel behaviour. In
us to harness the potential benefits, ensure it is turn, the data can support the identification and
accessible to all and avoid negative impacts. We development of measures that influence future
are witnessing rapid developments in many areas travel demand and mobility networks.
that could mean more people are able to choose
walking, cycling and public transport. These Future Mobility Zones (FMZs)
changes could support a more inclusive society Smart city initiatives, that use data and technology
where the young, elderly, persons with mobility to create a more efficient and integrated network,
challenges, as well as those living in rural areas, such as Smart Motorways and Urban Traffic
have new travel options, and offer new ways of Management Control.
transporting goods to and around the region.
Improved and faster wireless technology, will
The main areas being explored, or where advances support development of many technologies. The
are occurring and evolving, are as follows: ability to access information, particularly when
out and about, is critical to enabling people to
Connected and Autonomous (driverless) Vehicles
maximise opportunities to access the services
(CAVs) have the potential to radically transform
they require.
the transport system in the longer-term future.
However, the evolution of CAVs needs to be Carbon reduction technology, such as cleaner
carefully managed. CAVs offer the opportunity fuel and energy, are increasing in prominence
for fewer people to own cars, if sharing vehicles and availability. This includes hybrid and electric
and journeys becomes the norm, providing an vehicles, and e-bikes.

29
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 4:
Embracing technology and partnerships continued

Timescales are hard to predict, and a technological initiatives to improve mobility.
transformative change that is driven by some or
all of these advances may not even occur. While We will release open source data for application
mobility changes are mostly likely to occur just developers to build apps and digital platforms,
beyond the lifetime of this JLTP4, many of the so the community can have direct involvement in
JLTP4 schemes will have a long lifespan, so enhancing our service. Data should be shared and
the potential technological impact needs to be open to avoid the creation of a monopoly. Open
considered. This will mean we are prepared for data is crucial with mobile phones and real-time
where we want to be, rather than adapting to information playing an increasingly important role
the new mobility environment we find ourselves in providing choice. We will put an expectation
in. Initially, we will produce a strategy on CAVs on our partners to provide us with any data
and MaaS setting out our position, including our they collect, to guide the future development of
concerns and ambitions. transport.

As a starting point the West of England has bid We recognise the need to gain confidence and
to become one of three areas nationally to share public trust in using new technologies. We will
£70m of Future Mobility Zones (FMZ) funding to encourage suppliers and partners to work closely
maximise the benefits from transport innovation in with elderly and ‘harder to reach’ sectors of
urban areas. The core projects within our FMZ bid
are a data hub to unify datasets and gather new
data. The aim is to maximise the understanding
of travel demands and traffic and a mobility as a
service platform connecting operators, consumers Case Study: Flourish
and transport authorities. For the user, it will mean Flourish concentrated on connectivity
new services, bespoke information and offers and older people. Flourish trialled some
a single platform to plan and pay for mobility world leading Vehicle to Infrastructure
services. Other aspects of the FMZ involve the (V2I) technology including the latest
development of Mobility Stations to improve generation of Wi-Fi for cars. It demonstrated
physical connectivity; trialling of micromobility communication between vehicles, and
modes; and deploying dynamic demand responsive between vehicles and a base station. Flourish
transport services to improve first and last mile developed driverless pods tested in campus
connectivity and access to employment. type environments, as well as in simulators.
Flourish focused on the needs of older people
Advancing together when using CAVs, and built a detailed model
of how Bristol could operate in future CAV
We are committed to partnership working to scenarios.
ensure we are at the forefront of implementing
technological advances in transport, through Partners: Flourish – Atkins (part of SNC-
developing and sharing knowledge, lessons Lavalin), Airbus Group, Axa, Dynniq, React AI,
learned and innovations. The ambition for the West Designability, OPM, Aimsun (part of Siemens),
of England is to become a European leader in the Bristol City Council, South Gloucestershire
progressive roll-out of new technologies and new Council, Transport Systems Catapult, Age UK,
forms of mobility. We will work with and support University of Bristol and University of the
national and local legislation that encourages West of England.
safe and sustainable travel, especially through

30
March 2020

the population, to enable them to embrace new
opportunities.
The West of England authorities were project
partners with the ground-breaking Flourish and Case Study: Venturer
Venturer projects, which considered the potential
Venturer concentrated on autonomy. The
for, and long-term impacts of, technological
state-of-the-art Wildcat autonomous vehicle
developments such as CAVs. Both projects involved
developed by BAE Systems allowed Venturer
academics, as well as legal and insurance experts,
to develop a range of new sensor and
to understand the societal implications of these
control technology with experts at the Bristol
technologies. A regional technology consortium
Robotics Laboratory. A series of increasingly
to combine the knowledge of these partners
complex tests were carried out over three
along with vehicle manufacturers, communication
years. Year 1 focussed on handover between
providers, technology specialists, national research
human and machine; Year 2 on interaction
projects, and academics of the universities in the
between the Wildcat and other vehicles;
region has been set up.
and Year 3 on interactions between the
The Government’s Innovate programme is Wildcat and pedestrians and cyclists. It also
delivering research and innovation projects. demonstrated “see through technology”
where one vehicle reports to the vehicle
We recognise the high cost of widespread behind it what is in front. Venturer partner
implementation of new mobile technologies and Williams developed an advanced simulator
will work with suppliers and other partners to help based on a Range Rover Evoque that could
ensure that it does not only benefit areas or users replicate the real-world scenarios, as well
where the highest level of financial return can as testing human perceptions of a range of
be gained, and that rural areas, in particular, factors in a CAV.
are not overlooked.
Partners: Venturer – Atkins (part of SNC-
Lavalin), AXA UK, BAE Systems, Bristol City
Council, South Gloucestershire Council, First
Group, Fusion Processing, Williams Advanced
Engineering, University of the West of
England and University of Bristol.

31
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 4:
Embracing technology and partnerships continued

Maintaining and developing wider
partnerships
The key to success in delivering JLTP4 is to work
closely with our stakeholders and continue to build
new partnerships. A JLTP4 Advisory Group was
established to provide technical and professional
advice, comprising over 20 representatives of
transport operators and providers, transport user
groups, transport discipline experts and emerging
technology specialists. WECA and the four West
of England councils will continue to maintain and
develop partnerships with:
l Local and national transport operators and
providers
l Transport user groups
l Persons with reduced mobility groups l Local
businesses and business groups l Community
and voluntary sector
l NHS (including Clinical Commissioning Groups)
and local sport organisations
l Educational establishments
l Community Rail Partnerships
l Police and Local Community Safety Partnerships
l Neighbouring councils (including across the
River Severn)
l Service providers e.g. electricity network
operators
l West of England Road Safety Partnership
As each individual project is developed a
consultation plan will be developed tailored to
the relevant stakeholders unique to the impacted
community and scheme type.
Specific examples of how we work, and will
continue to work with groups or organisations, are
set out in the connectivity chapters.

32
March 2020

Section 5:
Improving connectivity
We will provide a well-connected sustainable Park & Ride (P&R) will play an important role in
transport network that offers greater, realistic enabling people living outside the urban areas,
travel choice and makes walking, cycling and public who do not have easy access to public transport,
transport the natural way to travel. Trips into and to access central areas by non-car modes. By
within the West of England will be seamless, faster, providing P&R sites on prioritised routes into the
cheaper, cleaner and safer. main urban areas, the accessibility, reliability and
convenience of P&R services will be improved.
It is often said that our network is at capacity,
particularly during the morning and evening peak We recognise that for some people the private
periods, but this is only the case if you consider car is essential and for others it is often the only
it in terms of ‘vehicle space’. If we considered our realistic mode of travel, such as those in rural
roads in terms of ‘people space’ there is actually areas where a reasonable level of bus service is
plenty of available capacity on our road network. not sustainable. The needs of people with personal
mobility challenges are recognised and supported.
The focus for investment is on increasing the In line with our responsibilities under the Equality
attractiveness of more active and sustainable Act 2010, we will ensure all new infrastructure,
modes, both by improving these networks and vehicles and information are as accessible as
opportunities and implementing measures that possible. We will deliver improvements to existing
can manage private car use. Individuals will be transport networks, targeting parts that cause
empowered to change their travel habits, with most disadvantage. This includes rural and
sustainable modes becoming the preferred choice deprived areas, which are in danger of getting left
for journeys, if journeys need to be made at all. behind.
New and expanded rapid and mass transit, across In seeking to reduce the level of emissions,
the Bristol urban area and providing links towards including carbon, we will provide infrastructure
the East and North Fringe, Bath and the airport, to support the use of electric vehicles. We will
will be transformative, providing fast and reliable also continue to explore the use of mechanisms to
journeys for residents and visitors. It will be reduce dependency on private car use, including
supported by comprehensive walking, cycling, bus providing continued support in the development of
and rail networks, that enable people to get to new technologies.
stops/stations quickly and easily. The quality and
coverage of this supporting network is critical, as Our strategy for improving connectivity in the West
the first and last mile of any journey is often the of England is shown in Figure 5.1.
most important factor in determining mode choice.
This JLTP4 is structured around improving
Attracting trips made by private car onto rapid and connectivity at four levels. These are not exclusive;
mass transit will bring improvements in journey some of the policies and interventions are
times, reliability, air quality, carbon emissions and relevant at more than one level, although they
overall attractiveness of the network for more have not been repeated. As a plan that focuses
sustainable modes. Less traffic will improve the on the West of England region rather than local
perceived safety and security of the network, and areas, connectivity at the most strategic level is
the reallocation of road space, where appropriate, considered first.
will allow streets to be transformed, creating better
places and improved public realm in urban areas.

33
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 5:
Improving connectivity continued

Figure 5.1: Strategy for improving connectivity

Walking and cycling are
the preferred choice for
shorter trips and to access
public transport
Well-connected public
Use of mechanisms to reduce
transport, focussed around
dependency on private car use
mass and rapid transit,
in urban areas, thereby
supported by a comprehensive
improving air quality, public
walking, cycling, local bus and
realm and supporting
rail network
sustainable network Achievement
improvements of JLTP4 vision,
objectives and
outcomes Technology developments
to reduce the need to travel
Park & Ride sites on radial and enable seamless journeys
routes to intercept private through improved ticketing
cars entering the main and information on transport
urban centres choices

Highway capacity can be The use of road space is
reallocated to sustainable and more effectively managed by
active modes of transport, technology
where appropriate

Beyond the West of England Within the West of England
Journeys into and out of the West of England, Journeys wholly within the West of England, but
including to other areas in the South West, South longer than approximately 10km, including those
Wales, national and international. The focus is between main urban areas. There is recognition
primarily on: that long trips start with a local trip. The focus is
on:
l Strategic road and rail networks, including the
role of coaches l Developing rapid and mass transit, and
supporting and enhancing existing public
l Supporting the role of the port and airport, for transport
both passengers and freight
l Managing the demand of vehicles on the
network
l Technology, to manage the network, provide
future travel opportunities, and reduce
environmental impact
l Freight and the needs of businesses

34
March 2020

Local
Journeys of up to approximately 10km, including
all journeys wholly within one urban area and
those between neighbouring rural areas, and rural
and urban areas. The focus is primarily on:
l Active travel, including improving cycling and
walking networks
l Travel planning and increasing knowledge about
sustainable modes
l Providing easily accessible information
l Access to services, including remote working
and reducing the need to travel
l Improving air quality

Neighbourhood
Journeys within local communities, both urban and
rural. The focus is primarily on:
l Removal of physical barriers, such as severance
caused by major roads
l Safety and security, both perceived and actual
l Master planning, local planning and public
realm
This JLTP4 is not structured around transport
modes; however, Figure 5.2 sets out where the
modes have the biggest role to play in improving
connectivity in the West of England. Note that many
journeys will combine at least two modes of travel.

35
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 5:
Improving connectivity continued

Figure 5.2: Role of transport modes in improving connectivity at different connectivity levels
Personal Travel
Neighbourhood Local Within WoE Beyond WoE
Walking
Ferries/boats
Cycling
Taxis and Private Hire Vehicles
Mass and rapid transit
Bus
Rail
Motorcycles and mopeds
Car/Electric Vehicle
Park and Ride
Coach
Aeroplane

Freight
Neighbourhood Local Within WoE Beyond WoE
Delivery Bikes
Light Goods Vehicles
Heavy Goods Vehicles
Rail/Port/Airport

36
March 2020

Section 6: Connectivity beyond the
West of England
Beyond West of England challenges Beyond West of England policies and
The West of England serves, and requires linkages interventions
to, the wider South West, South Wales, the rest Two main policies will support delivery of the
of the UK and international locations, to meet JLTP4 objectives at the beyond West of England
its growth targets and ambitions. The economic connectivity level:
viability of the West of England and surrounding
areas is dependent upon the provision of l B1: Enhance competitiveness of major gateways
convenient and attractive access arrangements and improve connectivity to international
for industrial, business, shopping and tourist trips. markets
However, trip lengths mean travel choices are l B2: Improve strategic resilience of the network
often more limited for longer journeys. Combined for all trips
with a network that is increasingly under pressure,
specific challenges for connectivity beyond the The policies will be delivered by focussing on
West of England have been identified, building on specific interventions.
the general challenges included in Section 2:
B1. Enhance competitiveness of major
l The Strategic Road Network (SRN), particularly
the M4 and M5 motorways, have heavy traffic
gateways and improve connectivity to
flows due to both longer distance through traffic, international markets
and local movements that perceive the SRN to
offer the best route (EG)£(EG)
Support sustainable and
Support growth
inclusive
sustainable
and
economic
Support
inclusive
sustainable (EG)
and growth
inclusive
economic economic or
arrows
of £
increasing
graph
or£ or
arrows
(EG) £
graph of
orgrowth of arrows increasing
increasing
graph

This policy contributes towards the delivery
Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth graph of arrows increasing
Enable equality and
Enable
improve
Enable accessibility
equality and
Enable
equality and improveaccessibility
(EA) and
equality
improve accessibilityequal
improve(EA)(EA)
accessibility equal equal
open
or or
signsign
door
equal
(EA) sign or open sign
door
open or open door
door
Address poor airAddress
quality poorpoor
and take
air
Address
quality
actionpoor
against
and air climate
action
taketake
quality and take
against
change action
climate
(CC) thermometer/cloud
against
change climate
(CC) thermometer/cloudthermometer/cloud
Address air quality and action against climate change (CC)change (CC)
thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better
Contribute
health,to to
wellbeing,
better
Contribute
health,
safety
to wellbeing,
better
and security
health, wellbeing,
(H)
safety and heart
security
safety (H)
and heart heart
Contribute better health, wellbeing, safety and security (H)security (H)heart

of the following objectives and outcomes:
Create better places
Create(BP)
better places
Create (BP)
better google pin/ tree/sunshine
google pin/pin/google
tree/sunshine
pin/ tree/sunshine
Create better places (BP)places (BP) google tree/sunshine

l The removal of tolls on the Severn crossings in
2018, has resulted in increases in traffic using
the crossings, for which mitigation measures will
need to be sought 1,3,4,5 1,2,4,6 5 1
l Both the Port of Bristol and Bristol Airport have
aspirations to increase throughput, impacting on
the area’s transport infrastructure The main interventions that will support the
delivery of the policy, are:
l HGV and other freight delivery movements
are increasing, due to rising freight volumes, l Work with Bristol Airport to maximise the
impacting on the already congested highway airport’s transport connectivity as a local, sub-
network regional and regional transport interchange

The impact on the built and natural environment, l Enable improved transport connectivity with
particularly air quality, means alternative realistic Bristol Port
opportunities need to be investigated for longer
distance freight and people movement.

37
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 6:
Connectivity beyond the West of England continued

Work with Bristol Airport to maximise the
airport’s transport connectivity as a local, sub-
regional and regional transport interchange Case study: Bristol South West
Bristol Airport is the ninth busiest airport in the UK Economic Link study (BSWEL)
and carried over 8 million passengers in 2017. It North Somerset Council completed the
has applied for expansion, which if approved would BSWEL study in 2019. The BSWEL project
cater for 12 million passengers per annum by the was developed to assess existing network
mid-2020s. The airport is also required to produce constraints and resilience issues and
an airport Master Plan, which sets out long term to provide a framework to assess what
expansion plans towards 2050. transport packages could support economic
development along the corridor.
Regardless of expansion plans, improving
connectivity to Bristol Airport is crucial. In The study explored transportation
particular, we will work to increase public improvements along the A371-A368-A38
transport in the short term, with improvements to corridor between Bristol, Bristol Airport,
bus and coach services serving the airport, and Weston-super-Mare and M5 J22,
in the long term through a high-frequency mass improvements to Worle Station and a mass
transit corridor. transit link to Bristol Airport. The identified
transport improvement packages would have
There has been significant investment in improving a number of likely benefits:
accessibility in recent years, including the South
Bristol Link and improvements to the Airport • Supporting sub‐regional and regional
Flyer frequent bus service. However, further economic, employment and housing growth
and more significant improvements are needed, including any potential future growth at
such as mass transit on the corridor linking the Bristol Airport should this be approved
airport with Bristol centre. This will enable more through the planning process
efficient use of transport space and provide the • Improved connectivity, multimodal and
improved connectivity needed whilst also acting mass transit surface access provision to
as a transport interchange for the surrounding and from Bristol Airport ensuring benefits
rural communities. Enhanced connectivity is also of new infrastructure are shared with local
required between the growing town of Weston- communities
super-Mare, the J21 Enterprise Area, the Weston • Enhanced network resilience and reliability
Villages developments and the M5. Connectivity by addressing congestion along key
will improve onwards to Banwell, through realising strategic routes to the Airport and the
development opportunities and improvements to wider sub‐region
transport and the quality of life both bypassing and
• Improving the environment and quality of
within the sensitive village centre.
life for residents and businesses in the area
The Airport Flyer express bus service from central
Transport packages have been identified
Bristol saw a doubling of capacity in early 2018.
and would require more detailed options
While operating up to at least every 10 minutes
assessment work, should the funding
during the daytime, it only operates hourly in
become available and the local and regional
the early morning, making it a less viable option
requirements for them develop.
for passengers and staff needing to arrive at the

38
March 2020

airport early. This also applies to those travelling We will work with the airport to limit the increase
on direct buses from Bath and Weston-super-Mare, in demand for additional car parking provision,
the latter of which only has an hourly service and support them in identifying infrastructure that
all day. prioritises lower emission vehicles.
Bristol Airport is required by Government to Bristol Airport has dedicated airport private hire
produce an Airport Surface Access Strategy. operators. Whilst private hire vehicles need to be
Improved access arrangements will enable the readily available to passengers, operators will be
airport to provide passengers, staff, businesses, encouraged to improve their vehicle fleets and
delivery and also local public transport users a embrace technological advances in electric and
greater range of sustainable transport options for a autonomous vehicles.
more accessible regional transport interchange. It
will include options to improve connectivity across At present, there are no designated air freight
transport modes including Park & Ride, local bus services operating at Bristol Airport, although
services, and highway junction improvements on an estimated 900 tonnes of cargo per year of
the nearby transport network, and exploring tram, passenger belongings is carried in passenger
light rail and heavy rail opportunities. This could aircraft. The Airport has no specific plans to
be partly funded through S106 contributions, either introduce any air freight route as part of the
from existing planning permission or any future ongoing expansion plans, but as it would be a
contributions, should any expansion be approved. commercial operator’s decision, there is still the
potential for this to happen. Approximately 1500
The airport is making sustainable improvements freight vehicles (LGVs and HGVs) use the airport
to some of its operations through national main entrance per day, which would increase
initiatives such as Sustainable Aviation, and their should the proposed expansion plans be approved.
own initiatives such as the Noise Action Plan and
its Environmental Impact Fund. However more We will support Bristol Airport in including
significant measures will be required to respond to freight in its Airport Surface Access Strategy, by
the Climate Emergency challenge. identifying sensitive freight routing and delivery
periods to minimise the impact, if road freight is
We will work with Bristol Airport to define and the only option.
deliver a low carbon, accessible, integrated, and
reliable transport network, for both staff and
passengers to access the airport when they need
to.
While ensuring affordable car parking is available
for passengers for whom public transport is
not an available or practical option, the demand
for driving to the airport needs to be managed.
The provision of infrastructure to cater for
technological advances in electric and autonomous
vehicles will be prioritised, supporting delivery
of improved air quality, health, and meeting the
challenge of the Climate Emergency.

39
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 6:
Connectivity beyond the West of England continued

Enable improved transport connectivity
with Bristol Port
Bristol Port is one of the most productive and Case study: Bristol Cruise Terminal
technically advanced ports in Europe. Current Bristol Port now accommodates a range of
movements at Bristol Port include the storage tourist cruise liner services, with 2017 seeing
and onward movement of bulk cargo, employees 12 different cruise lines embark from the port
accessing the site for work and cruise passengers. to places such as Norway, the Caribbean and
In April 2018, the Department for Transport (DfT) Mexico, the Azores, Portugal and Spain, the
set out their plans for improving the connectivity Fjords, the Scottish Highlands and Islands,
of England’s ports by publishing ‘England’s Port Normandy, Canary Islands and Madeira.
Connectivity: the current picture’. It contained nine This will improve the region’s offer for both
regional case studies, including Bristol. outgoing and incoming tourists, enabling
competitiveness with other national cruise
Issues impacting on the efficiency of port terminals.
operations (including Avonmouth and Portbury),
are: The development of the Bristol Cruise
Terminal also opens up an important tourism
l Journey time and reliability on the M5, market for visitors to the West of England
particularly evening congestion at Junction 19, region and beyond. With good strategic road
and the huge increase in traffic and congestion links, local rail links to Bristol and Bath and
in the summer months a direct waterway access to Bristol and the
l Resurfacing and rebuilding of sections of the North Somerset coastline, visitors are well
A403, as it forms a crucial link to the port connected to a range of local and regional
tourist attractions, providing a new and
l Rail connectivity, such as gauge clearance for important source of income and recognition
containers and the need to remove potential for the West of England region.
conflicts with passenger services
l The motorway severs the connection to/from
local neighbourhoods, making it difficult for local The amount of freight is set to increase in the
employees to access the area by modes other future, with recent or planned investments at
than private car Bristol Port including £20m towards car handling
facilities and consented development for a potential
l Significant freight movements to and from the £800m container terminal. Improved connectivity
port discourage walking and cycling due to is vital for the port as it expands further, enabling
perceived safety and air quality issues, and shift it to remain such an economically important player
work means it is difficult and unattractive for in the region’s development and national and
employees to use public transport international links.
We will work with Highways England to improve We will support Bristol Port in strengthening
M5 Junction 19 to enhance access between the existing healthy working relationships with
motorway network and the Royal Portbury Dock, Network Rail, Highways England, relevant local
Portishead, Portbury and Pill. authorities and the Local Enterprise Partnership,
ensuring road and rail needs are incorporated into
wider connectivity improvement plans and any
expansion is ‘green’.
40
March 2020

There is an opportunity to maximise the developing B2. Improve strategic resilience of the
tourist offer from the Bristol Cruise Terminal, network for all trips
by providing more seamless connections across
multiple travel mode choices. For onward travel Support sustainable
Support (EG) growth
inclusive
economic
growthand
inclusive
sustainable
and
economic
Support
sustainable
and inclusive (EG)£(EG)
economic £ or
arrows
of of
increasing
or£graph
arrows
(EG) £
graph of
orgrowth of arrows increasing
increasing
graph

This policy contributes towards the delivery
Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth graph arrows increasing
Enable equality and
Enable equality
improve and
Enable accessibility
improve(EA)
accessibility
(EA) and
equality
improve
accessibility equal equal
or open
signsign
door
equal
(EA) sign or open equal or sign
door
open or open door
door
Enable equality and improve accessibility (EA)

to Bristol city centre, opportunities could include:
Address poor airAddress
quality poorpoor
and take
air
Address
quality
actionpoor
against
and air
takeclimate
action
quality and take
against
change action
climate
(CC) thermometer/cloud
against
change climate
(CC) thermometer/cloudthermometer/cloud
Address air quality and take action against climate change (CC)change (CC)
thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better
Contribute
health,to
wellbeing,
better
Contribute
health,
safety
to wellbeing,
better
and security
health, wellbeing,
(H)
safety and heart
security
safety (H)
and securityheart
(H)
heart heart
Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety and security (H)

of the following objectives and outcomes:
Create better places
Create(BP)
better places
Create (BP)
better google pin/ tree/sunshine
google pin/pin/google
tree/sunshine
pin/ tree/sunshine
Create better places (BP)places (BP) google tree/sunshine

increased frequency ferries along the River Avon
and to the North Somerset coastline; improved bus
and coach connection via the nearby Shirehampton
Park & Ride; local rail connection via Avonmouth or 1-6 4 3,4 2
Shirehampton rail stations; and improved car hire
options at the Bristol Cruise Terminal (including
electric vehicle hire). Improved bike hire facilities
The main interventions that will support the
and cycling provision along the A4 Portway cycle
delivery of the policy, are:
route could benefit both tourists and staff who
work at the terminal. l Maximise opportunities arising from
improvements to the strategic road and rail
We will work with Bristol Cruise Terminal to
network, and identify and support delivery of
explore ways that onward travel options across
further changes
multiple mode choices can be improved, including
opportunities with emerging technologies, such as l Identify opportunities to manage the impact of
electric vehicles. Severn Bridge tolls removal
l Support the role of coaches for residents and
visitors
l Manage and mitigate the impact of regular and
infrequent events on the transport network

Maximise opportunities arising from
improvements to the strategic road and rail
network, and identify and support delivery of
further changes

41
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 6:
Connectivity beyond the West of England continued

Strategic Road Network The JTS, which was co-funded by HE, highlights
The Government’s Strategic Road Network (SRN), the need for substantial investment in the SRN,
covering the country’s motorways and some major including extensions to Smart Motorways and
A-roads, is managed and operated by Highways new and improved motorway junctions and
England (HE). As well as providing for strategic links. This includes the need for a new motorway
movements into and through the West of England, junction between M4 Junction 18 and Junction
the use of the SRN needs to be balanced with an 19 (Junction ‘18a’), an associated link road to the
appropriate level of local accessibility and the use of A4174 Ring Road and a new motorway junction
the Major Road Network (MRN). between M5 Junction 21 and 22 (Junction ‘21a’)
to serve Weston-super-Mare, Bristol Airport and
We will work with Highways England and an associated link road to the A38. The link road
neighbouring authorities to find the optimum to the A4174 Ring Road scheme would help tackle
balance of use of the SRN for strategic movements congestion problems in the north-east fringe of
and appropriate local accessibility. Bristol and help businesses operate more efficiently.
Investment in the network is funded by the Road A feasibility study identified a new junction located
Investment Strategy (RIS) and set out in the Route in the Emersons Green Enterprise Area. This would
Strategies, three of which include SRN roads require improvements to the M4 between Junction
passing through the West of England: 19 and the new Junction 18A, and improvements to
all junctions on the Ring Road from The Dramway
l London to Wales (M4, M32, M48 and M49) to the A4 Hicks Gate junction. HE has accepted the
broad principle of these proposals, and we will work
l Birmingham to Exeter (M5) with HE on the detail of scheme location and design,
l South West Peninsula (A36/A46 south of the M4) ensuring they meet the needs of the SRN and local
road network.
These routes frequently suffer from high levels of
congestion and delays, particularly around Bristol We will work with Highways England to progress
and on the A36/A46. This impacts on the operation further work on a new M4 Junction 18A and
of adjoining and parallel roads, with some traffic associated improvements to the A4174 Ring Road.
(including heavy vehicles) using less appropriate We will also work with Highways England and
roads; further, there are serious challenges with Sedgemoor District Council, Somerset County
network resilience during incidents, causing Council and beyond into the south west, including
temporary road closures. Conditions are particularly improving strategic connectivity with major
poor during summer weekends and holiday periods employments at Hinkley Point and Bristol Airport.
on the M5. Improving resilience on the SRN,
through the provision of new motorway junctions or The Government has published a revised Route
completion of link roads, would better manage the Investment Strategy (RIS2) to cover the period from
strategic movements between the far south west 2020 to 2025, which includes a vision for the SRN to
and the rest of the country, as well as in the Bristol 2040 and beyond. It was hoped this would include
area, and will enable the sustainable delivery of substantial investment in the SRN across the region
growth along the corridors it serves. (as detailed in this section of the JLTP4) to ensure
future growth is not constrained, and that growth in
The only committed HE scheme included in the neighbouring regions does not negatively impact on
current RIS delivery plan is the new M49 Avonmouth the West of England SRN routes.
junction (to improve access to Avonmouth and
Severnside), currently under construction.

42
March 2020

We will work closely with Highways England, The Port of Poole saw the completion in 2018 of a
neighbouring authorities and other partners on the £10m expansion of the harbour to accommodate
RIS2 M4 to Dorset Coast study and connectivity large cruise and cargo ships, which is expected to
improvements and will continue to make the case see a notable increase in the volume of goods and
for new and upgraded junctions on the M4 (new passengers. This will increase demand for journeys
Junction 18a) and M5 (Junctions 14/19/new 21a) along the north-south corridor.
and Park & Ride on the M32.
We will continue to work with Bournemouth,
Direct improvements on the SRN itself should Christchurch and Poole, Dorset and Wiltshire
include measures to benefit non-car modes. This councils through the Western Gateway
is important in the Bristol area, where interactions Subnational Transport Board in encouraging
between the M4, M5 and local highway network are Highways England to undertake a strategic study
closely linked. The successful delivery of the M32 to develop the case for improvements to north-
bus lane and bus-only junction demonstrates the south strategic connectivity, in seeking to include
benefits of greater integration of urban mobility and funded schemes in the next Government’s Road
the strategic network. Investment Strategy. This includes:
We will encourage Highways England to give l South Coast to M4 connectivity improvements:
greater emphasis to non-car modes on the SRN in to provide a high-quality transport option.
making investment decisions, as well as providing
greater flexibility in using funding to help deliver
l A46 to M4 route improvements at Cold Ashton:
infrastructure on the local highway network near to capacity improvements especially at the Cold
the SRN. Ashton roundabout to remove existing delays

The SRN is limited in providing for longer distance HGV movements will continue to play a significant
north-south journeys passing through the region. role in distributing freight into and through the
The A36/A46 route provides a strategic north–south West of England. However, there is potential to
link between the south coast and the M4, much of improve the efficiency of road freight movements
which is single carriageway. Links from the region by consolidating, enabling fewer, fuller, and cleaner
to Poole/Bournemouth and Weymouth are via less vehicles to take the most appropriate routes.
direct and lower standard A roads, particularly the Alternatives, such as water and rail freight, will
A37 and A350. remove trips from the highway network and help
to reduce the impact of freight movements on the
The A36 and A46 have large proportions of freight environment. Emerging technologies will enable
traffic and there are safety concerns on the A36 further use of cleaner vehicles. We will use the
through Claverton village and on the A46 at Hartley West of England Key Route Network (see Section 7)
Bends. The A36/A46 also routes traffic through the to designate a core network for freight movements,
congested edge of central Bath, contributing to the ensuring these are kept on the most appropriate
poor air quality along London Road. routes and that appropriate levels of lorry parking
are provided in suitable locations.
An initial economic study into improved north-
south connectivity has identified that key outcomes
of improvements to this corridor could result in an
additional £20.5 billion generated to the economy
with 1,400 jobs being created annually.

43
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 6:
Connectivity beyond the West of England continued

We will work with Network Rail, the South area, providing attractive interchange facilities for
West Highways Alliance, Highways England, the bus users, pedestrians and cyclists. This will allow
Freight Transport Association and other partners users to secure their bike and continue by bus or
to manage cross-boundary freight movements train, thereby facilitating multimodal trips.
and promote more efficient movements, such
as consolidation centres and the use of lower Bristol Temple Meads has a critical regeneration
emissions modes. role in unlocking and serving as the catalyst for
growth, from the Temple Quarter Enterprise Zone
Strategic Rail and St Philips Marsh to development areas across
The West of England lies at the confluence of a the West of England. The ‘Temple Quarter’ will
number of frequent long-distance inter-city and see new homes and employment space being
regional train services. Great Western Railway delivered, the University of Bristol’s new Enterprise
(GWR) links the region with inter-city trains to Campus and other retail and leisure uses.
London, South Wales and the South West, and We will work with Network Rail, Homes England,
regional trains between South Wales and the Bristol City Council, the University of Bristol,
south coast via Salisbury. CrossCountry inter- transport operators, developers and other
city train services provide links to the Midlands, delivery agents to transform Bristol Temple
the North, Scotland and the far South West, and Meads into a regional interchange, enabling
South Western Railway provide services to London seamless connections with sustainable modes and
Waterloo. providing new cycling and walking links to local
Bristol Temple Meads station is a nationally destinations.
significant rail interchange, as well as a vital Bristol Parkway, located on the London to
regional and local transport interchange and South Wales and cross-country routes, is also a
gateway to the city and wider region, including principal station providing access to education and
Bristol Airport. The station has over 11 million employment facilities, metrobus and offering faster
passengers passing through each year, with usage services to London than from Temple Meads. Bath
anticipated to reach 22 million by 2030. Sitting at Spa station, the main gateway to the region for
the heart of the region, the station has the potential tourists, is served by services from South Wales
to be the best connected and most productive area to the south coast, in addition to trains to London.
within the West of England; it is key to delivering Weston-super-Mare station is located on a single
other transport infrastructure. line loop off the main line and is served by a very
The station is managed by Network Rail, who limited number of long-distance trains. As a result,
along with WECA, Homes England and Bristol there is an aspiration to provide an hourly service
City Council is leading on the development of from Weston-super-Mare to London. Worle station,
a masterplan to ensure the station has the on the eastern side of the town, could provide
capacity, design and quality it needs to meet its an alternative stop for services remaining on the
role. New northern and eastern entrances will main line, a parkway style interchange for Weston-
be provided along with new internal passenger super-Mare and a gateway for Bristol Airport.
circulation routes, additional platform capacity, We will continue to work with our neighbouring
a new transport interchange and expanded cycle local authorities to support service and
parking. The redevelopment of Temple Meads infrastructure improvements that would benefit
station will promote sustainable transport choices West of England residents and businesses.
for trips to and from the station and surrounding

44
March 2020

The full electrification of the Great Western Main Other key connectivity aspirations for the JLTP4
Line to Bristol Temple Meads, via Bath Spa and are:
Bristol Parkway, remains an aspiration, as does
the extension of electrification from Birmingham
l Bristol to Birmingham and HS2 – Midlands
to Bristol and on to Weston-super-Mare. As well Connect proposal for two extra trains per hour
as delivering a carbon neutral network it will bring (one from Temple Meads, one from South Wales
benefits to long distance services and provide the via Parkway) linking to Moor Street station for
longer-term opportunity to link into HS2 (High HS2 services to the North at Curzon Street
Speed 2). l Western Rail Link to Heathrow – through
We recognise there are considerable capacity services from Bristol, South West and South
constraints around Bristol and the wider rail Wales
network. A high-level report, the Greater Bristol l Three train per hour IET service from London
Area Rail Feasibility Study jointly commissioned by Paddington to Bath Spa and Bristol Temple
the Department for Transport and WECA, identified Meads
enhancements and the capacity improvements
required to deliver them. This work will now feed l Hourly IET service London Paddington to Exeter
into the joint Network Rail and WECA Strategic Rail via Taunton and Weston-super-Mare
Programme for a 10-year delivery plan and 25-
We will work jointly with Network Rail, the
year Strategic Outline Business Case. The Williams
Department for Transport and the franchise and
Rail Review may provide further opportunities
freight operators to produce a 10 Year Delivery
for greater WECA involvement in services and
Plan and 25 Year Strategic Outline Business
investment and these will be explored.
Case as part of the Strategic Rail Programme
Train services to and from the region also suffer for the West of England. The Programme will
from short-term resilience and operational issues. improve network capacity and resilience, provide
These include the closure of the line west of infrastructure and rolling stock enhancements
Exeter following severe weather damage to the and deliver improvement schemes. This includes
sea wall in the Dawlish area and train operator better long- distance rail links to the South
staff shortages, faults with rolling stock and signal West, South Coast, South Wales, London and the
failures. Midlands.

Although frequent, north-south public transport
Identify opportunities to manage the impact
connections are poor between Bristol and Bath and
the south coast. Slow regional or local stopping of Severn Bridge tolls removal
rail services operate to Weymouth, Southampton Since the end of 2018, motorists are no longer
and Portsmouth. Travelling to Bournemouth and charged for crossing the M4 and M48 Severn
Poole requires a change of trains, meaning that crossings. Over a year on, the impacts of their
the 70-mile road journey from Bristol to Poole removal are still being realised, and the potential
takes around 3 hours by train. Coaches do not mitigation options are part of an ongoing
currently offer a direct or convenient alternative to assessment. The lower transport costs and
rail either, with trips to the south coast requiring opportunities for increased agglomeration of the
a journey via London. The Western Gateway’s Rail economies either side of the bridge is anticipated
Strategy aims to address these connectivity issues. to increase trips across the bridges, with the
following impacts:

45
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 6:
Connectivity beyond the West of England continued

l Increased delays on already congested sections
and junctions on the M4 Junction 19 to 20
and M5 Junctions 16, 17 and 19, including an
increase in heavy road freight movements in this Case Study: Zeelo
area and on connecting routes Whilst more traditional forms of public
transport move thousands of users across
l Increased congestion at these and other the region on a daily basis, improvements
locations is expected to lead to a diversion in technology are quickly resulting in more
of trips onto other routes across the West of shared mobility services being developed.
England, impacting on the North and East Fringe,
Severnside and North West Bristol, the A4 One such example is Zeelo, a UK company
Portway, the A369 and the A46 from M4 to Bath founded in 2017 which uses complex
algorithms to enable transport services and
l Increased delay to buses, as they get stuck in routes to be devised around the user in order
additional traffic. Trains could also become less to better meet the consumer’s needs.
attractive, as the cost of travelling by private car
becomes more comparable Initially devised to provide a shared mobility
service for under-served areas the company
A number of interventions identified through now provides services for commuters
technical work will increase capacity and enable including a service with multiple pick up and
mode shift, thereby reducing the impacts of drop off points between Newport and Bristol.
congestion on the road network. These include new Through its website and mobile phone app
or improved mass transit, metrobus, Park & Ride, Zeelo allows users to select a pick up and
bus and cycle routes, and junction improvements, drop off location, choose their preferred
such as: journey date and time, purchase multiple
tickets at a reduced rate and receive those
l Divert traffic to the Bristol urban area from the
tickets directly to their mobile phone device.
M4/Almondsbury towards the M49
This service and many like it are now giving
l Capture vehicle trips bound for North Somerset thousands of daily travellers in locations that
and the Bristol urban area by new Park & traditional forms of public transport found
Ride, metrobus and other bus links, as well as difficult to reach a viable alternative to the
MetroWest car.
l Consider demand management measures,
such as local network charging measures We will work with Highways England, Network
and controls to raise revenue for sustainable Rail, public transport operators, local authorities
transport alternatives. in South East Wales and other partners to identify
options that will manage the impact of Severn
l Improve the offer (including frequency) of cross-
Bridge tolls removal, and work with DfT to secure
Severn public transport linking the West of
appropriate funding to mitigate the impacts on the
England with Chepstow, Newport and Cardiff
West of England.

46
March 2020

Support the role of coaches for residents
and visitors
Coaches (chartered and scheduled) play an Case Study: Weston-super-Mare
important role in the West of England’s economy bus and coach interchange
and provide inclusive mobility for all citizens As part of the ambitious Weston-super-Mare
and visitors. Coaches can reduce dependence Town Centre Regeneration programme, North
on private cars and so help improve air quality, Somerset Council has won funding to create
congestion and provide access to leisure a centralised bus and coach interchange
opportunities for those who are unable to use cars. at Alexandra Parade. The centralised
interchange will integrate bus and coach
However, the presence of large numbers of services into one area, with improved real-
coaches can have a detrimental effect, with impacts time information infrastructure and waiting
on noise, air quality and visual impact, as well as facilities. With tourist numbers increasing
unofficial parking. These effects are compounded in Weston-super-Mare, the new interchange
when coaches don’t stop within our cities meaning will ensure that the already important role of
that there is little or no benefit in terms of the coach travel in bringing tourists to the town
tourist economy. As a result, there is a need to will be improved further. It will create a key
improve the management of coaches, including public transport interchange closer to local
embracing new technologies to enable improved facilities, helping to achieve a vibrant town
enforcement, better monitoring, and more efficient centre for visitors and residents alike. The
movement and parking. scheme is due to be completed spring 2021.
The West of England has important tourist and
visitor destinations that attract both national
and international visitors with its combination We will provide improved pedestrian routes and
of a varied natural environment and stunning wayfinding between coach drop off and pick up
rural areas, a rich cultural heritage, and historic locations and key destinations, offering easy, high
market and seaside towns. It is essential that the quality and convenient routes.
destinations continue to be attractive for coach Without a light or heavy rail link to Bristol Airport,
tourism and leisure, to sustain the tourist economy. the role of coaches is becoming increasingly
This includes providing facilities so visitors wishing important in delivering passengers from across a
to arrive by coach can do so in a safe, convenient wide catchment area. The airport’s catchment area
and comfortable manner. spans the South West and into South Wales, with
Scheduled coaches, including National Express 19% of air passengers originating from Devon and
and Megabus, require high quality provision for Cornwall, 10% from Somerset and 20% from South
passengers to wait for, board and alight from Wales. There have been coach services set up to
coaches, and interchange with connecting local improve public transport access to manage this
travel options. Services currently operate from demand, including up to ten coaches per day from
Bath and Bristol bus and coach stations, UWE Cardiff and an hourly service linking Plymouth,
and on-street stops across the region where Exeter, Taunton, Bridgwater, Burnham and Bristol
waiting facilities are poor. Coach operators require city centre with the airport. These services have
standing space and driver facilities while coaches given direct access to the airport for a large
are between services. geographical area.

47
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 6:
Connectivity beyond the West of England continued

We will work with coach operators to
embrace new technologies, enabling improved
enforcement, better monitoring and more efficient
Case study: Tourism in Bath
movement and parking of coaches that will seek to
The City of Bath is an important tourist reduce the need to travel in the most sensitive and
destination, in both regional and national already congested parts of our highway network.
terms. A total of 5.8 million visitors come to
Bath each year. The total value of tourism
to the city is £432 million per annum. Coach Manage and mitigate the impact of regular and
visitors are important to the economy of Bath infrequent events on the transport network
with an estimated 11,000 coaches visiting The strategic highway network, rail network and
Bath each year, and it is estimated that coach coaches all have a role to play in providing access
tourism is worth £25 million per annum. for tourists and for those coming into the West of
England to attend events. Tourism, in particular,
has a significant role to play in supporting the
We will develop a coach strategy for Bath that will
economy. However, we need to provide the
form an effective long-term plan for management
infrastructure to support trips and enable visitors
of coaches in the city, and the provision of
to make the ‘right choice’ for travel, minimising the
adequate coach infrastructure.
impact individual trips have on the network.
We will continue to work with Bristol Airport
We will provide travel information at major
to support and promote the use of coaches as a
interchanges, such as airports and rail stations, on
sustainable way to access the site.
travel options into the West of England, including
Bristol City Council has commissioned a study to cost and journey time.
investigate the value of coach-based tourism on
The transport elements of event management
Bristol’s economy and to identify possible sites
depend on whether it is a regular event, such as
for coach parking, interchange and pickup/drop
football matches, or an irregular event, such as
off locations. Once the results of this study are
large concerts. Planners will work together to
available, Bristol will seek to produce its own coach
minimise clashes of events, liaising with rail and
strategy for the city. North Somerset Council will
highway operators to ensure the network can be
investigate coach interchange and coach parking
prepared for additional trips on a given day.
provision in Weston-super-Mare town centre,
alongside a wider review of parking issues in the We will continue to encourage key event
district. organisers and transport operators to work
together to minimise the impact of large scale
We will continue to work with coach operators
planned events.
and the Confederation of Passenger Transport and
seek to achieve ‘coach-friendly town’ status for
our key destinations.

48
March 2020

Section 7: Connectivity within
the West of England
Within West of England challenges including congestion in central areas,
reducing productivity of the workforce and
Without further major intervention, cars will competitiveness of the West of England
continue to be the dominant form of travel and
could become significantly cheaper to use with l Climate change is impacting on the standard
emerging technology. Further increases in the of our transport network, including temporary
volume of car trips, such as from more people problems such as localised flooding, and long-
living and working in the area, will lead to term issues such as potholes
significant increases in traffic and pose problems to To deliver a more resilient and reliable network,
the future operation of the transport network. the role of the private car needs to be managed,
Building on the general West of England challenges local and regional networks need to be integrated,
identified in Section 2, more specific challenges for and realistic alternatives need to be provided.
connectivity within the West of England have been As well as our need to reduce carbon emissions
identified, as follows: and take action against climate change, there is a
need to adapt and create resilience to unavoidable
l Congestion is currently experienced on the M32, climate change. The scale of work to be done to
reflecting heavy commuting into central Bristol, achieve these changes, and the cost of delivering
as well as other radial routes (A4 Bath Road, A4 network improvements at different levels, should
Portway, Cumberland Basin, A37 and A420), the not be underestimated.
A4174 Ring Road, the A432 and A38, the A4 and
A36 in Bath and the A370 in Weston-super-Mare
Within West of England policies and
l Managing parking supply to reduce the number interventions
of trips made by the private car into town and
city centres wherever possible and increase Connectivity within the West of England will
the trips made by walking, cycling, and public support delivery of the JLTP4 objectives, by
transport, as the availability and cost of parking focussing on these main policies:
is closely linked with the demand for motorised l W1: Provide more public transport options and
vehicle use improve service quality
l Bus and rail use is significantly lower than l W2: Provide for journeys where public transport
other major UK cities, with common perceptions is not an option
including limited travel options, congestion,
reliability, resilience and connectivity l W3: Use, as appropriate, measures and
technological advances to influence and better
l Overcrowded trains deter people from using rail manage demand
for business and leisure trips
l W4: Improve resilience of the network, providing
l Most business-related travel within the West increased reliability
of England is by road, and the large amount
of delay on the road network adds costs to l W5: Enable business clustering and the efficient
journeys, both in terms of lost productive staff movement of freight
time and increased costs of moving goods
The policies will be delivered by focussing on
l Potential clustering of businesses is limited specific interventions.
by the capacity of the transport network,

49
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

It should be emphasised, as illustrated in Figure rails. Examples include trams as an above ground
5.2, that interventions for connectivity within the option, or underground trains as a below ground
West of England are not limited to W1 to W5 above, solution.
as both bus and rail trips routinely cover local
connectivity the policies for which can also be Any mass transit network will be complemented
found in Section 8. by the emerging Bus Rapid Transit network,
metrobus. We have delivered an initial, 50 km
W1. Provide more public transport options metrobus network that provides for trips up to
around 10 miles in length and with a stopping
and improve service quality
pattern around every 500 metres.
A future challenge is the need to manage the
Support sustainable and (EG) and
growth
inclusive
sustainable
economic
growthand
Support
inclusive
sustainable
economic
Support
sustainable
and inclusive
Support £ orgrowth
(EG)
inclusive
economic graph of
economic(EG) £
arrows
or
growthincreasing
graph
(EG)of £
arrows
or graph
increasing
of£ or
arrows
graph of
increasing
arrows increasing

This policy contributes towards the delivery
Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG) £ or graph of arrows increasing
Enable equality and
Enable
improve
equality and improve and improve
equality
accessibility
Enable
(EA)
equality
accessibility
Enable Enable improve
accessibility
and
(EA) equal
accessibility
(EA)
equality and sign
improve sign or
door
equal
open
or(EA)
accessibility equaldoor
dooror open
opensign
sign orequal
equaldoor
open
(EA) sign or open door
Address poor airAddress
quality and
poortake
air
Address
quality
actionpoor
against
andAddress
air
take
quality
climate
action against
take
change
poorand
air
Address action
climate
quality
(CC)
poor thermometer/cloud
andair
against
take
change
action
qualityclimate
(CC)
and thermometer/cloud
against
change
take climate
(CC)
action change
against (CC)
climate thermometer/cloud
thermometer/cloud
change (CC) thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better
Contribute
health,to better
wellbeing,
Contribute
health,
safety
to better
Contribute
wellbeing,
and security
health,
tosafety
betterand
health,
wellbeing,
(H)
Contribute to heart
security
safety
wellbeing,
(H)
better and security
safety
health, heart
and
(H) security
wellbeing, safety(H) heart
heartsecurity (H)
and heart

of the following objectives and outcomes: integration of any mass transit network and
Create better places
Create better
Create(BP)
better places
(BP) Create (BP)
(BP) places
placesbetter
Create google
better places (BP)pin/ google pin/
tree/sunshine google pin/
tree/sunshine pin/
tree/sunshine
google tree/sunshine
google pin/ tree/sunshine

metrobus with the local bus network. The objective
would be to maximise patronage on higher-quality
mass transit and metrobus, whilst maintaining a
1-3,5 1-6 1-4 4 1,2,4
comprehensive bus network for those not directly
linked to these networks, and avoiding duplication
of services. The mass transit network will also
The main interventions that will support the need to link to walking and cycling networks to
delivery of the policy, are: support first and last mile trips by active modes
to the frequent-service mass transit corridors,
l Provide high quality and reliable mass and rapid and take account of, and where possible, enhance
transit parallel walking and cycling facilities. This will
l Support and enhance existing public transport enable and support people to access the network
services by active travel, maximising its accessibility.

l Improve the availability and accessibility of High quality and reliable mass transit
accurate travel information and ticketing The delivery of mass transit schemes will be
transformative for trips within the West of England,
Provide high quality and reliable mass and whilst also having the potential to shape the scale
rapid transit and pattern of employment and housing growth.

Many cities across Europe accommodate a mass A mass transit network could dramatically improve
and/or rapid transit public transport network, with journey times across the Bristol and Bath urban
an emphasis on segregation from general traffic. areas, achieving reliable 15-20 minute connections
These can efficiently provide public transport trips between Bristol city centre and the urban fringes
that are less well covered by local bus or rail and Bristol Airport; and Bath gaining easier
networks, either due to the journey distance/speed, and faster movement in and around the city. In
or limited access to rail services. both instances congestion could be significantly
decreased, leading to quicker and more reliable
Technical work, including the JTS, identified the journeys for other modes such as cars and buses.
need for a mass transit public transport mode These changes would encourage clustering of
across four core corridors with higher potential trip businesses, attracting additional jobs, and enable
demand, to bring additional capacity and attractive, additional housing and economic growth.
reliable journey times. Mass transit usually runs on

50
March 2020

The ambition is for new forms of mass transit (e.g. The scheme development process will take several
light rail or trams) where the potential is greatest years and include extensive engagement and
for high passenger flows. On major corridors, consultation. A mass transit system will take many
rail-based mass transit will be considered to years to deliver and we must begin work now if it
accommodate future demand and to maximise is to become a reality and unlock the potentially
mode shift from car-based trips. transformative benefits for the West of England.
Mass transit will, wherever possible, be configured We will continue to progress the work on mass
to complement metrobus routes and to integrate transit options, leading to delivery of services
with the existing passenger rail network. New along four corridors linking Bristol Airport, the
mass transit services could be introduced on some north and east fringes, A4 Bath corridor, and
corridors by diverting through traffic onto other Bristol city centre.
new or improved roads. For example, on the A4
Bristol – Bath corridor through Brislington, road B&NES has already carried out a high-level study
space will need to be reallocated to accommodate to understand the potential of re-introducing mass
mass transit services by diverting through traffic transit into Bath and how this might form part
onto the Callington Road Link. of the wider transport strategy for the city. By
doing this, Bath would join other cities and world
In some locations, it will be very challenging to heritage sites that have reintroduced mass transit
achieve on-street running, for example through as part of the solution to reduce congestion, ease
East Bristol, North Bristol, and some parts of South traffic pollution and re-energise the economy.
Bristol. In these cases, some underground sections Through further detailed technical work, the
may be required. The JTS highlighted potential for major role trams could play in helping to meet
mass transit routes on the four major corridors, as the future growth and transport needs of the city,
shown in Figure 7.1. and improved connectivity with Bristol, will be
established.
Feasibility studies are underway to explore all
mass transit options for above and below ground Through further detailed technical work, B&NES
for the Greater Bristol area and to connect Bristol will continue to explore the possibility of
and Bath as well as the urban areas within Bath introducing mass transit in Bath to help meet the
itself. This will consider the best performing future growth and transport needs of the city.
options for mass transit.
The studies will explore:
l Potential technology options for each route and/
or the entire network
l Potential alignment options and station/stop
locations
l Patronage forecasts
l Benefits assessment
l Funding options
l Environmental impacts

51
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

Mass transit Bristol to Airport Connecting the city centre, South Bristol, and the Airport.
In the short to medium term, feasibility and options will be
developed on a metrobus extension to Bristol Airport. This
would enable many to choose fast, frequent, space-efficient and
a lower carbon mode choice to this local and regional transport
interchange, instead of the private car.
Mass transit Bristol to North Fringe Connecting the city centre, North Bristol, Southmead Hospital,
Cribbs Causeway.
Mass transit Bristol to East Fringe Connecting the city centre, East Fringe and East Bristol.
Mass transit Bristol to Bath Initial priority for metrobus corridor to Bath, with longer-term
ambition for a high-frequency mass transit solution between
Bristol and Bath. Longer-term ambition for light rail between
the Hicks Gate/Keynsham area and Bristol city centre,
to serve Hicks Gate Park & Ride/transport interchange and
beyond, and Temple Meads.

Figure 7.1: Potential mass transit routes

52
March 2020

Bus Rapid Transit – metrobus Proposed extensions include:
In 2018/19, the councils launched a 50 km network l Bristol city centre to Avonmouth/Severnside
of three metrobus corridors, creating a new,
bus-based rapid transit mode with a forecast l Bromley Heath to Yate
passenger total of 4.5 million passenger trips per
year. The metrobus network has the following
l Almondsbury to Thornbury
characteristics: l Bower Ashton to Nailsea and Clevedon
l An emphasis on segregation from general traffic, l Bristol to Bath (A4) corridor metrobus, with
through bus lanes or bus-only alignments, with potentially a light rail system extending from
shared running in certain areas where traffic is Hicks Gate to Bristol in the longer term
free-flowing
l Bristol Parkway via The Mall to Cribbs Patchway
l Highly visible and identifiable stops and
interchanges, with good walking and cycling l Orbital metrobus route connecting South Bristol
links to local neighbourhoods to Emersons Green via the Ring Road, serving
Whitchurch, Hicks Gate and the East Fringe
l Rapid boarding times, with ticket purchase
before boarding, facilitated through the provision l Weston-super-Mare network (to link the
of `iPoints’ at all stops new Weston Villages developments, the
accompanying M5 Junction 21 Enterprise Area,
l Consistent marketing and branding, emphasising and the proposed Park & Ride site east of the
the quality and status of the mode town)
l A high-quality bus-based vehicle, with twin doors l Bristol city centre to Bristol Airport
and ultra-low emissions
We will investigate and deliver future extensions
l Complementary benefits for cyclists, pedestrians to the metrobus network, in a closely coordinated
and public realm delivered on the back of the manner.
metrobus infrastructure
We support the provision of a ‘consolidation
The JTS recommended substantial extensions package’, to lock in the benefits of the network,
to the metrobus network, to be delivered up to including further bus priorities, signal upgrades
2036, which is supported by the JLTP4. These are and vehicle replacement.
proposed where they enable sustainable economic
growth and contribute to substantial improvements
to accessibility in the local area.
Extensions are proposed to serve the growing
communities outside the Bristol urban area,
together with an orbital route connecting South
Bristol to Emersons Green via the ring road,
serving Park & Ride sites. A new orbital metrobus
coupled with associated Park & Ride facilities will
reduce existing pressure on radial routes leading
into Bristol and help provide new capacity for
sustainable forms of travel in this area.

53
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

Case study: metrobus
The recently completed network represents setting of the monument. There were three
a £230 million investment and includes some separate metrobus schemes coordinated under
major interventions such as a kerb-guided a joint governance structure.
busway, the first bus-only motorway junction in
The initial network is forecast to carry around
the country on the M32, and a major remodelling
4.5 million passengers per year.
of the Cenotaph area in Bristol city centre to
improve public transport interchange and the

Figure 7.2: Existing and committed metrobus routes

Existing metrobus routes
Committed metrobus routes

54
March 2020

Support and enhance existing public bus passenger information, concessionary travel,
transport services and non-commercial bus services shared with the
constituent councils). The Bus Services Act 2017
The existing bus and rail networks will continue
gave additional powers to the Combined Authority
to have an important role to play in providing
Mayor, including stronger operator partnership
connectivity within the West of England. The need
arrangements and the power to franchise local
for infrastructure and service improvements is
bus services under certain conditions. A franchised
recognised, alongside making it easier to use bus
network would be similar to London, where WECA
and rail.
would specify routes, fares and frequencies
Bus Strategy and operators would bid to run them. It should,
however, be borne in mind that a franchised
Public transport has a key role to play in enabling
network, of itself, will not deliver cheaper fares or
mode shift and tackling congestion. This includes
higher frequencies, as these would probably still
seeking to provide realistic alternatives to private
need to be funded through public subsidy.
vehicle trips by continuing to improve local bus
and rail networks, completing and expanding of the Local bus services need to be as fully accessible
metrobus network, and improving routes to bus as possible to passengers experiencing a mobility
stops and stations for people cycling and walking. impairment. As well as being Equality Act compliant,
local bus services need to provide a service which
The Bus Strategy supports this JLTP4. It will
is attractive to different sections of the population
detail how further growth in bus patronage will
in different locations. Crucially, this must include
be encouraged, including specific proposals and
services connecting villages and rural areas with
frameworks intended to provide faster, more
at least one of our towns, cities or major transport
frequent, reliable and accessible services, combined
interchanges. Any remaining local bus services
with new and improved bus stations and other
need to be used by local residents in rural areas
interchanges. Operator engagement has already
and smaller villages in order to maintain the bus
been undertaken to help inform current challenges
service’s commercial viability and generate demand
to improving the network and opportunities to grow
for additional services. This way, residents in rural
patronage.
and deprived areas may not necessarily be able to
Buses play a pivotal role in the current transport get direct links to their final destinations, but are
network. The West of England has experienced able to access education, employment and services
significant, recent growth in bus passenger via interchanging at the nearest public transport
numbers, bucking the national trend. This increase corridor, whether this be through local bus services
is likely to result from changes to fares, the or community transport solutions. Public transport
expansion of residents’ parking schemes in Bath vehicles should also be of high, modern standards
and Bristol, bus lanes, infrastructure upgrades, to utilise alternative fuels where possible, to
improved information, and fleet investment by minimise emissions and help improve air quality.
operators. Bus passenger satisfaction has also
The Bus Strategy will consider a wider framework
improved. This success will be built on and an
to assess gaps in the commercial bus network,
ambitious target to grow passenger numbers
including consideration of estimated patronage,
further will be set.
links to deprived areas, links to employment and
Following its creation in March 2017, the Combined contribution to tackling traffic congestion. This
Authority has a number of functions related to the information will be used to ensure bus services
2000 Transport Act (including provision of provide realistic opportunities for travel.

55
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

We will work with developers, education and key
employment locations to identify how routes can
be made more attractive in terms of facilities and
Case Study: Greater Bristol
providing ‘seamless door-to-door journeys’.
Bus Network (GBBN)
We will work with operators and local The GBBN was an ambitious project covering
communities to preserve, support, enhance and 10 ‘showcase’ bus corridors along strategic
promote conventional bus services to meet rural transport corridors across the four West
needs, within available resources, both within of England authorities. The £80 million
available resources and through the identification investment was funded by a range of project
of new funding opportunities. partners, including the DfT and First West
of England, as well as local/developer
Improving coordination between the various
contributions.
transport providers in the voluntary sector has
the potential to offer users improved efficiencies in The key outcomes were to improve and
public and demand responsive transport provision. upgrade the bus network infrastructure, and
to enhance the bus passenger experience
We will work with bus operators, and where
with better buses and improved information
necessary invest in the community and voluntary
and reliability; reducing congestion and
transport sector, to provide services in areas
reducing emissions. The GBBN was
that are not adequately served by scheduled bus
also developed to deliver substantial
services.
improvements to the speed, quality, reliability
We will work with operators to focus local bus and attractiveness of bus services.
services on connecting to high frequency services,
Improvements included over 120 new
to provide well integrated, seamless and reliable
buses, nearly 1,000 improved bus stops
passenger transport services.
with new shelters & access, more than 300
The English National Concessionary Travel real-time information (RTI) displays, bus
Scheme, funded by central Government, is priority signals, bus lanes to bypass traffic,
administered locally by WECA and North Somerset pedestrian and cycle access improvements,
Council under the joint Diamond Travelcard brand. public realm improvements and various
At the time of writing, the constituent councils marketing and promotion initiatives.
of WECA carry out most of the administrative
The GBBN set out an Evaluation Plan that
functions on its behalf. The Diamond Travelcard
identified a range of performance indicators
offers additional benefits which are funded locally.
to measure project effectiveness. These were
This means those with the Diamond Travelcard
bus patronage, Park & Ride patronage, bus
can travel for free on journeys starting in our area
satisfaction, bus punctuality, rail patronage,
at any time except between 0400 and 0900 on
area wide traffic levels, congestion, air
Mondays to Fridays, also on local buses starting
quality, cycling trip numbers and road safety.
anywhere else in England on Mondays to Fridays
With one exception, where it was not possible
between 0930 and 2300 and any time on Saturdays,
to make a conclusion, the targets were met,
Sundays or public holidays.
and many were exceeded.
Councils have powers to introduce other
concessions for specific groups of people, such as
young persons or apprentices. Such concessions,

56
March 2020

generally reduced fares rather than free travel, where necessary of road space from general
need to be funded locally, but can be effective traffic movement and parking, in order to reduce
in making access to education and employment journey times and improve reliability. Investment
easier. in infrastructure will be complemented by operator
investment in more, low and ultra-low emission
Through the Bus Strategy, we will consider future vehicles, including vehicles powered by bio-fuel
opportunities for the concessionary travel scheme sources and/or electrically-powered.
across the West of England.
We will deliver the Greater Bristol Bus Network 2
The A4 corridor, which runs through Saltford, to provide further targeted enhancements to the
is one of the busiest routes in the region. The bus network.
JTS notes that bus priority on the approaches to
Saltford would improve bus journey times and Other than a limited number of 24-hour bus routes
punctuality through the village and benefit longer in Bath and Bristol, local bus and train services do
distance journeys along the A4 corridor between not run throughout the night. This restricts access
Bath and Bristol. A bypass for Saltford has been to some employment opportunities (for example
considered previously to reduce congestion Avonmouth and Emersons Green) and deters shift
through the village and enable road space workers from using sustainable travel.
reallocation to public transport.
We will work with local bus and train operators,
We will undertake further work to assess options and Department for Transport, to review the need
to provide bus priority on the approaches to for bus services to operate throughout the night.
Saltford before a decision on a Saltford Bypass is
made. Consideration will be given to the potential Rail
conversion of bus priority measures in future to We want to transform suburban rail services in the
accommodate other forms of mass transit, such as West of England with new and high frequency turn
light rail. up and go services, new lines and new stations.
Most interchanges comprise two or more bus Stations will be brought up to a new high standard
stops on-street. There is potential to improve with improved passenger facilities and levels of
the quality and availability of interchanges, as accessibility, making them step free to enable all
well as perceived reliability. We will prioritise passengers to travel by train. Modern ticketing,
improvements to interchanges for consideration fully integrated with local bus services, will make
and inclusion in scheme packages in transport all journeys seamless.
programmes, such as GBBN2. GBBN2 will improve
passenger experience, taking account of best The branding of services, information and stations
practice in both the UK and overseas, by providing will be made consistent, where possible. This will
better bus services, targeted bus priority measures provide passengers with the confidence they are
(and better enforcement), traffic signal upgrades, using an integrated network of fast and frequent
interchange upgrades, enhanced passenger services. This could be extended across other
information and integrated ticketing on core, modes to provide one transport network, be it
urban and inter-urban corridors, complementing buses, trams, trains, ferries, cycles or walking all
proposed metrobus and mass transit routes. under the one brand.
New bus lanes and other priority infrastructure
will need to prioritise road space for bus and
metrobus services including the reallocation

57
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

Our proposed and well advanced MetroWest Building on MetroWest we want to see new turn up
programme will deliver by 2023/24: and go style services alongside enhanced routes
across the local network. We will work on:
l Half hourly services on the Severn Beach to
Bath Spa and Westbury Lines. This is forecast to l Three trains per hour on the Severn Beach Line
generate 0.6 million new passengers a year
l Four trains per hour for local stations between
l Reopening of the Portishead Line in 2024, with Bristol Temple Meads and Westbury
initially an hourly service (half hourly aspiration)
to Bristol Temple Meads and new stations at
l Two trains per hour on the Henbury Line with
Portishead and Pill. This is forecast to generate one of these services going to Yate/Gloucester
0.4 million passengers a year via Bristol Parkway

l Re-opening of the Henbury Line with new
l Strategic rail-based Park & Ride and parkway
stations at Henbury and North Filton to serve stations
Cribbs Patchway New Neighbourhood (5,700 new l Enhanced services on the Cardiff to Portsmouth,
homes) and if approved the new Bristol Arena. Bristol to Taunton/Exeter including Yatton
This is forecast to generate 0.4 million new and Nailsea & Backwell, Bristol to Yeovil and
passengers a year Weymouth, Bristol to Gloucester/Cheltenham
l New station at Ashley Down on the Filton Bank and Bristol to Swindon routes

l Half hourly services between Bristol Temple
l New Bristol to Oxford via Bath Spa service with
Meads and Yate (3,000 new homes) by 2022, with links to East-West Rail
possible extension to Gloucester. This is forecast l Additional stops at Worle (as the gateway and
to generate 0.25 million new passengers a year interchange for Weston-super-Mare and Bristol
l Stations to be brought up to a new MetroWest Airport) and Bridgwater (for Hinkley Point C).
high standard of passenger facilities, with step l New carbon neutral fleet of rolling stock to meet
free access current and future demand
l New station at Portway, part funded by the New l Station enhancements including longer
Stations Fund, to serve the adjacent Park & Ride platforms to support housing and employment
site growth
l New station at Charfield funded through the Through the Great Western, Cross Country and
WECA Investment Fund to support housing South Western and Wales & Borders Franchises,
growth Western Gateway Rail Strategy and the joint WECA
l MetroWest services to be included and funded by and Network Rail Strategic Rail Programme we
the Department for Transport will work to secure new and enhanced services.

To date, over £26m has been invested by the West Bristol East Junction remodelling remains key
of England in developing MetroWest. It remains our to our plans, enabling MetroWest services and
rail priority. providing the capacity to run more trains. We
also recognise the importance of platform and
We will deliver passenger rail service and capacity concourse and interchange works at Bristol Temple
improvements, station upgrades and new stations, Meads as part of the Temple Quarter Master Plan to
including MetroWest Phases 1 and 2. improve capacity.

58
March 2020

Temple Meads, as highlighted in Section 6, acts as
a critical transport interchange for central Bristol,
the West of England and wider region, providing Case study: Mobility as a Service
interchange with the mass transit and metrobus in the West Midlands
networks.
In 2018, a monthly subscription ‘Mobility as a
We support the proposals for Bristol East Junction Service’ was launched in the West Midlands,
and the redevelopment of Bristol Temple Meads called Whim. Working in partnership with the
station and surrounding area. West Midlands Combined Authority, Whim
offers a single access point, via a smartphone
During the life of JLTP4 and the Strategic Rail app, to multiple transport options including
Programme, we will consider extending services local buses and trains, car hire, taxis and
beyond Henbury and new stations at Charfield, St cycle hire. Reflecting the market offer for
Annes Park, Saltford, Ashton Gate and Constable using mobile phones, users can either
Road, and new links to Thornbury, Pilning and subscribe on a periodic basis to receive
Bristol Airport. We will also work with planning access to these services for a fixed fee, or
colleagues to review the need to safeguard disused use the app for pay-as-you-go purchases on
rail lines where they could have a future role to a journey-by-journey basis. Three options are
play. currently being offered in the West Midlands
We will consider how new technologies can help region; pay-as-you-go, a standard monthly
deliver rail schemes, including options for light package including unlimited public transport
rail and tram trains, and how infrastructure costs and capped daily car rental rates, and a
can be reduced and affordable modern services premium monthly package that includes
can be delivered. unlimited public transport, taxis (within a
5km radius of the user’s location) and rental
We will work with train operators, the Severnside cars. Access to shared bicycles will also be
Community Rail Partnerships and others to available later this year.
promote rail travel and improve facilities at
stations, including ticketing and perception of Participating companies include bus operator
safety and security. National Express West Midlands, taxi app
Gett, car rental company Enterprise and
cycle hire provider Nextbike, which will be
Improve the availability and accessibility of launching in Birmingham later this year. The
accurate travel information and ticketing Combined Authority are keen to maximise
Providing a single accessible portal for clear, travel options without the need to own cars,
comprehensive and reliable information on which on average (worldwide) are parked up
travel options is essential for achieving seamless unused for about 96% of their lifetime.
door-to-door journeys. It provides people with Whim was first launched in Helsinki, where
the confidence to travel by public transport and it has 20,000 registered users, who receive a
active travel modes, particularly for journeys number of points which can be used as they
made less regularly. It will also help to overcome like for a combination of taxis and car rental
misconceptions relating to service frequency, fares trips each month, supplementing public
and journey times by public transport, bicycle or transport and cycling..
foot.

59
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

Information needs to be available in advance of the We have a statutory duty to provide local bus
journey, as well as being updated regularly ‘on the service information (including Real Time
move’. Bus and rail passenger information needs to
be provided in accessible formats, including audio Information). Existing strategies will be reviewed,
and visual announcements at stops and on-vehicle. and a Bus Information Strategy formulated to
Information provision and digital services is an include updated proposals for:
area we are innovating in and is developing rapidly, l Provision of timetable information at bus stops
including Mobility as a Service. We are ahead of and online
a lot of cities/ regions and want to continue to
develop provision, recognising the role this could l Real Time Information provision and monitoring
have in encouraging behavioural change. l Service information through Traveline, the West
Quality information will continue to be provided of England travelwest website, and regular social
online, through the travelwest website, as well as media updates
through reliable journey planning smartphone apps,
We will prepare a Bus Information Strategy to
such as UK Bus Checker. Opportunities to provide
update and replace the existing local authority
further information will be investigated, such as
documents, setting out the expected standard for
through Google Maps and citymapper. Citymapper
bus information.
can provide live running information and fares for
buses and trains, station or stop progress alerts The availability and use of `smarter’ and integrated
while on the move, and calories burnt for journeys ticketing needs to expand. Smarter ticketing and
by bicycle or foot. payments can speed up bus dwell times at stops
reducing journey times and improving reliability.
We will work with application developers to ensure
The use of mobile phone apps has greatly
as much travel information as possible is provided
increased the proportion of passengers using
for different journey options, including in rural
smart tickets, along with the greater availability
areas, building on the Government’s commitment
of the West of England TravelWest travelcard.
to improve real time information in rural areas.
Integrated ticket products already exist, but usage
We will work to ensure that information already
is currently low and smart applications need to
available will be built upon and combined in one
improve. WECA is allocating funding to widen the
place.
rollout of smart and integrated ticketing products,
Transport operators and providers will be required including multimodal products.
to make data they collect from app and website
Work will continue to develop an integrated
usage ‘open’, for use by others to inform and tailor
ticketing scheme that is flexible and easy-to-
future service and information provision.
use and the need for further statutory ticketing
Opportunities to enhance existing hard-copy schemes, and their revenue cost implications, will
information provision will be considered, ensuring be assessed. We are currently moving towards the
it is as up to date and relevant as possible. widespread adoption of contactless bank payments
Information provided in leaflets, timetables, at across bus operators, with operator products
libraries, leisure sites, large healthcare sites, major being accommodated on the travelwest card. This
supermarkets and transport interchanges, will functionality will facilitate a connected transport
ensure those who cannot access information online network that runs as smoothly and efficiently
can still get the information they require. as possible and forms a strong foundation for
developing future mobile and contactless ticketing

60
March 2020

scheme options where customers are automatically W2. Provide for journeys where public
charged the best fare available. transport is not an option
To enable and achieve ‘seamless door-to-door
journeys’ across the West of England, we will
Support sustainable and (EG) and
growth
inclusive
sustainable
economic
growthand
Support
inclusive
sustainable
economic
Support
sustainable
and inclusive
Support £ orgrowth
(EG)
inclusive
economic graph of
economic arrows
(EG) £ graph
oreconomic
growthincreasing
(EG)of growth
arrows
£ or graph
increasing
(EG)of£ or
arrows
graph of
increasing
arrows increasing

This policy contributes towards the delivery
Support sustainable and inclusive £ or graph of arrows increasing
Enable equality and
Enable
improve Enable
equality and and improve
equality
accessibility
Enable
(EA)
equality
improve
accessibility and
(EA)
Enable equalityequal
accessibility
improve accessibility
(EA)
and equaldoor
dooror open
opensign
sign orequal
equaldoor
or open
sign (EA)
door
equal
open
sign or(EA)
improve accessibility sign or open door
Address poor airAddress
quality and
poortake
air
Address
quality
actionpoor
against
andAddress
air
take
quality
climate
action against
take
change
poorand
air
Address action
climate
quality
(CC)
poor thermometer/cloud
andair
against
take
change
action
quality climate
(CC)
and thermometer/cloud
against
change
take climate
(CC)
action change
against (CC)
climate thermometer/cloud
thermometer/cloud
change (CC) thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better
Contribute
health,to better
wellbeing,
Contribute
health,
safety
to better
Contribute
wellbeing,
and security
health, wellbeing,
(H)
tosafety
better health,
and heart
security
safety
wellbeing,
(H)
and security
safety heart
and
(H) security heart
(H)
Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety and security (H) heart heart

work to roll-out a universal, multi-operator of the following objectives and outcomes:
Create better places
Create better
Create(BP)
better places
(BP) places (BP)
(BP) Create
placesbetter
Create google
better places (BP)pin/ google pin/
tree/sunshine google pin/
tree/sunshine pin/
tree/sunshine
google tree/sunshine
google pin/ tree/sunshine

smarter ticketing and payments and explore the
possibilities of its use across different transport
modes.
1-3 1-3 1,2,5 2-4 1,2

The main interventions that will support the
delivery of the policy, are:
l Provide Park & Ride and sharing schemes
to minimise the impact of single occupancy
vehicles
l Recognise the needs of motorcycle and moped
users

Provide Park & Ride and sharing schemes
to minimise the impact of single occupancy
vehicles
The existing Park & Ride services located within
the West of England successfully intercept
thousands of vehicles on a daily basis that would
otherwise be entering our already congested city
centres and can act as transport interchanges.
The West of England authorities recognise that
for some people the private car is often the only
realistic mode of travel. Park & Ride facilities
provide the opportunity for people living outside
urban areas whose only realistic option is to
drive and who do not have easy access to public
transport near to where they live, to transfer from
private car to public transport for onward journeys
into urban areas. By intercepting traffic, Park &
Ride releases highway capacity in central areas to
enable transfer of road space to walking, cycling
and public transport.

61
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

Building on work in the JTS, new and expanded We support delivery of an M32 Park & Ride site.
Park & Ride sites will be focussed on the main
arterial routes into Bristol and Weston-super- Other new locations and sites being considered for
Mare. The impact of any new Park & Ride provision expansion, include:
on the operation of the SRN will be assessed, along l A4 Portway expansion
with the impact on overall journeys made.
l A38/A4174 South Bristol Link new site
We support the concept of a ring of Park & Ride
locations around the urban areas, to help tackle l A4018 near Cribbs Causeway new site
traffic and air quality problems in central areas. l A38 North between Junction 16 and Thornbury
In Bath, the priority is to increase travel options new site
on the arterial routes that enter our main urban l A432 new site near Yate
areas to reduce single occupancy car use. Further
expansion of existing sites will also be investigated l A420 /Ring Road new site(s) to connect to the
contributing to carbon reduction in the congested East Fringe mass transit scheme
city centre.
l A4 Brislington site relocation to Hicks Gate
In Bath we will explore and support options for
increasing travel choices and reducing single l A37 Whitchurch new site to connect to metrobus
occupancy vehicle use into our urban areas. l A370 Long Ashton expansion
We will investigate further expansion and
improvement of the existing Park & Ride sites at Opportunities for additional sites could come
Newbridge, Lansdown and Odd Down. forward as part of any future review of the JLTP4.

We will deliver the Freezing Hill junction upgrade We will support the delivery of new or expanded
and improvements at two other junctions along Park & Ride sites, where appropriate.
the route between the A420 and Lansdown Park &
A new Park & Ride site to the east of Weston-
Ride.
super-Mare, potentially located near to the A370/
In the short-term, the priority in Bristol is to plug A371 junction, will be investigated. This site could
the gaps in existing provision, particularly to the be served by Weston metrobus services, to provide
north of the urban area. An M32 Park & Ride site a high frequency rapid service to the town centre.
would intercept the largest number of trips into
In North Somerset, we will investigate a new
the city, and have the most beneficial impact on
Park & Ride site to the east of Weston-super-
congestion, air pollution, and road safety. It would
Mare, potentially located near to the A370/A371
also help unlock the transformation of Bristol
junction.
city centre, enabling major public realm and
transport improvements outlined in the City Centre The performance of Park & Ride sites will be
Framework. dependent on restricting parking provision in
central areas and managing the cost of parking,
to ensure that Park & Ride is the more attractive
option compared to driving. The Park & Ride sites
will be planned so that traffic impacts are managed
around each site and any abstraction from existing
bus and rail services is minimised.

62
March 2020

The use of Park & Ride sites will be monitored Informal on street parking is already linked to
as we seek to understand the demand for later established radial corridors to Bristol and Bath,
opening of sites into the evening. These could where commuters park on radial bus corridors and
potentially be served by passing bus services, rather catch bus services into city centres. This often takes
than dedicated Park & Ride services. This will be place where there is a frequent bus service and a
considered further as part of the Bus Strategy. rural catchment area with limited bus provision,
for example in Radstock and Farrington Gurney.
In the short to medium term, the new and expanded However, in some locations parking can cause
Park & Ride sites will be served by bus, metrobus congestion and blight local neighbourhoods.
and rail. Informal rail based Park & Ride already
occurs, including at Bristol Parkway, Keynsham We will investigate providing off-street parking to
and Nailsea & Backwell rail stations, which will be create links to our urban centres on bus corridors
retained. at suitable locations, to minimise potential impacts
on surrounding areas.
Rail-based Park & Ride will continue to be explored
as part of the MetroWest programme of suburban Park & Share, where drivers meet at key places on
rail enhancements. the road network, one of the vehicles is parked and
people continue the journey to the destination in
Improved signage and Variable Message Signs on one car, will also be considered. At present, some
the approaches to Park & Ride sites will increase Park & Share activity takes place around Tormarton
awareness and usage of the sites, as will the quality (M4 J18), Falfield (M5 J14) and on the A466 outside
of the journey to/from the site and the ease and Chepstow. In some cases, inappropriate parking
speed of interchange. causes problems in local areas.
Complementary uses for existing and new Park We will investigate where Park & Share facilities
& Ride sites will be explored, with opportunities could be formalised, to encourage car sharing
for sites to provide Park & Cycle or Park & Stride, whilst better managing the impacts in local areas.
overnight lorry parking, coach parking, freight
consolidation functions, community uses, renewable Car share schemes and car clubs have a role to
energy generation, or even acting as bus depots. play where alternative modes of transport are not
Any complementary uses would need to consider available. There is a need to coordinate service
potential impacts on local communities and the local provision to make services more responsive to
environment. Operators would need to be involved, people’s needs and continue to support informal
as some proposals may require a parking charge to arrangements to widen its appeal. Car clubs
be introduced. can help to manage parking demand, encourage
households to dispense of their second car and
In the longer-term, we will explore the potential of generally encourage alternatives to privately owned
new and expanded Park & Ride sites linked to mass cars. Further benefits can be realised if the car club
transit routes, as well as exploring the potential vehicles are low emission.
for sites to act as transport interchanges which
could include improved links to public transport, We will investigate opportunities to increase the
substantial increases in cycle parking, cycle hire use of car sharing through technology, including
facilities, improved wayfinding infrastructure to via social media, and implement measures as
facilitate walking, innovative last mile freight appropriate.
solutions and access to electric charging points.
We will support the uptake and expansion of a car
club network of low emission vehicles.

63
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

Case study: Mobility Stations
The city of Cologne in Germany has • Secure, pre-bookable cycle parking lockers
implemented a number of multimodal hubs
across the city known as mobility stations, • Pre-bookable car parking
which is a concept that could be developed • Trailers or cargo bikes to hire to carry
across the West of England. Mobility stations are shopping
multimodal interchange points that provide first
and last mile solutions to connect communities · Demand responsive transport, such as
to frequent public transport services and first/last mile taxi services to connect to
provide integrated transport options. neighbourhoods

We have frequent public transport services on • Combine ‘mobility as a service’ operators at
our corridors but people not aware of or cannot mobility stations to ensure maximum usage
easily access them. Currently the connections and cluster mobility options for citizens
across the city are not legible, giving a poor
In every neighbourhood similar options could
perception of the public transport offer in the
be provided at mobility stations, depending on
West of England.
the space available to provide variety to make
Each neighbourhood could have a mobility it easier for residents to connect to frequent
station of varying scales containing clear public transport services and to reduce car use
branding, clear wayfinding and clear, integrated for local trips.
travel information. At larger interchange
In public consultation, there was strong support
points such as P&R sites, metrobus stops,
to improve the existing public transport offer
train stations and corridors with frequent bus
and this could provide a solution to make the
services facilities at the mobility stations could
most of our existing infrastructure with little
include:
additional investment. Mobility stations can also
• Shared dockless bike hubs address the lack of orbital connections between
neighbourhoods by providing clear wayfinding
• Micro freight consolidation centres to show options to connect easily to mobility
• EV charge points stations in other neighbourhoods.

• Shared car club vehicles

64
March 2020

Recognise the needs of motorcycle and moped W3. Use, as appropriate, measures and
users technological advances to influence and
Motorcycles and mopeds can offer an affordable better manage the demand of private car
means of transport for trips where public transport use
is limited and walking and cycling unrealistic.
They have a role to play not just at the within the This policy contributes towards the delivery
improve
Enable
Enable equality and
and
Support
Support sustainableSupport
Enable
Address poor airAddress
equality
quality
Address
Contribute to better
sustainable
inclusive

poor
health,
Contribute
equality
and
Support
economic
sustainable
accessibility
Enable
Address
take
air
poor
and
quality
action
air
to better
improve
equality
growth
inclusive
sustainable
and
and

wellbeing,
Contribute
and inclusive
(EA) and
improveaccessibility
against
and
poor
quality
safety
health,
quality
climate
taketake
air
and
and
(EG)
and
economic
economic

health,
growth
accessibilityequal
improve(EA)(EA)
accessibility
action
security
wellbeing,
to better
inclusive

against
take
change
and
action
safety
economic
growth

(CC)
action
climate
against
wellbeing,
(H)and
(EG)£(EG)
(EA) sign or open
thermometer/cloud
against
change
climate
heart
safety
security
orgrowth
graph of

and
(H)
(EG) £

climate
(CC)
change
arrows
or£ or
door
equal
equal
thermometer/cloud
(CC)change (CC)
heart
graph
signsign
of
or open
or
arrows
of £
increasing
graph arrows
equal
or door
sign
of arrows increasing
increasing
graph
open
increasing
or open door
door
thermometer/cloud
thermometer/cloud
heart
(H)security (H)heart

West of England scale but also at the local level,
Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety and security

of the following objectives and outcomes:
Create better places
Create(BP)
better places
Create (BP)
better places (BP) google pin/ tree/sunshine
google pin/ tree/sunshine
google pin/
google pin/ tree/sunshine tree/sunshine
Create better places (BP)

where they can provide a space-efficient alternative
to driving, where walking, cycling and public
transport trips are not possible. They can provide a
more economical alternative to private car use and 1,5 1,4,6 1-5 2,3
enable access to opportunities and flexibility that
cannot otherwise be gained.
The main interventions that will support the
Greater levels of information about facilities for delivery of the policy, are:
motorcycle users will be provided, including
clear signage of facilities on the approaches to l Use technology to keep traffic moving
towns and cities, as well as ensuring their needs
are considered during design of new schemes
l Embrace technology to improve cleaner travel
and infrastructure. This includes road safety, options
where motorcyclists are disproportionately highly l Use, as appropriate, measures to influence and
represented in road safety statistics. Road safety better manage the demand of private car use
camera enforcement provides an opportunity for
driver education and road safety campaigns need
Use technology to keep traffic moving
to be targeted towards improving motorcyclist
safety. To address congestion we need to do more
than just improve mode choice. On some of the
The increased provision of secure parking in
congested routes in the West of England queueing
well-lit areas will be provided wherever possible,
and delay can already be severe. Future growth
particularly at public transport interchanges and
cannot be dealt with by continuing to widen roads
town centres. Opportunities to allow motorcycles
as space is not available.
in areas currently restricted to public transport
and pedal cycles will be investigated, and the use The role of technology is likely to become
of bus lanes to provide diversion from congested increasingly important in keeping traffic moving. In
areas of traffic in urban areas will continue to be a few certain circumstances it might be appropriate
permitted. to consider the use of charging mechanisms to
optimise network operation and ensure trips can
We will support the role of motorcycle and moped
continue to be made.
users, ensuring facilities and parking are provided
and clearly identified in appropriate locations. Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) are used to
inform road users of disruptions, and maximise
the efficiency of traffic signals to keep the highway
network operating as efficiently as possible.

65
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

Smart Motorway systems use technology to We will continue to work with Highways England
actively manage the flow of traffic. Managed by HE, and other key stakeholders to explore and develop
these are used on the SRN, including the M4, innovative measures to improve the efficiency
M5 and M32 motorway network through the West of the transport network, including car parking,
of England. through technology.
After a number of incidents, concerns about the
safety of Smart Motorways have emerged. As of Embrace technology to improve cleaner travel
February 2020, the DfT and Highways England options
are undertaking a review of the safety of Smart As discussed in Section 4, the introduction of
Motorways. Whilst we wait for an outcome of this technological improvements will present the West
review, the West of England does not support of England with challenges and opportunities.
the progression and construction of new Smart Connected Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs) and
motorways in the region. Mobility as a Service (MaaS) are currently at early
We will work with Highways England to stages of development and it is not yet clear how
implement Smart Motorway schemes on the M4 we should be responding; however, not being
between Junctions 18 and 19* and identify and involved in the mobility environment could result
develop improvements to the region’s strategic in missed opportunities and leave the West of
road network, complementing the delivery of new England behind other areas of the country. CAVs
and improved junctions. are likely to come in a variety of forms; from small
delivery robots, campus style pods, cars, taxis
The strategic transport network will continue to and even larger communal transport and lorry
be monitored by HE, with the transport networks platoons. Different types of vehicles will require
of Bristol, B&NES and South Gloucestershire different approaches. Local, sub-regional and
monitored by their own traffic monitoring centres. national Government will need to consider how to
North Somerset manages its own traffic signal manage these and who is responsible for which
network and has aspirations to improve monitoring element.
functions, should both demand and resource allow
it. Releasing open source data to transport network The fundamental transport issues, and the need
operators, including HE, will help to ensure that to prioritise sustainable and healthy transport, are
users of the network enjoy better journeys. likely to remain. However, there are a range of new
potential issues raised, including:
There is an increased role for technology in
improving knowledge of available parking l Conducting appropriate sensitivity testing in the
spaces, thereby reducing levels of driving around development of long-term major schemes to
searching for a free space. The development of explore the potential impacts of CAVs
apps, such as Parkopedia, enables drivers to l Ensuring that the policy framework and the
access real-time parking availability and tariffs delivery of any necessary infrastructure keeps
which, with the installation of kerbside bay pace and responds to the needs of increased
sensors, can include on-street spaces. These, levels of mobility associated with advances in
in turn, can support more efficient use of local technology
parking provision.

* schemes to be progressed in the light of the outcome
of the safety review by Highways England and the DfT

66
March 2020

l Encouraging the high-tech jobs associated with Use, as appropriate, measures to influence
driverless cars and new technologies and manage the demand of private car use
l Providing a test bed for CAVs, enabled by high The high demand placed on the transport network
speed broadband and open data, particularly across the West of England needs to be managed
along identified key transport corridors to ensure movement is efficient and journey times
l Encouraging shared forms of ownership, are reliable.
driverless buses, and shared CAVs For some, driving a car is essential for travelling
l Protecting and enhancing the commercial around the region. This may be due to mobility
viability of existing public transport services and impairments, the nature of work patterns or having
working with them to adapt to changes to transport bulky or heavy items. However, for
many people who currently use their cars there
l Responding to potential equality issues to will be opportunities to switch at least some
ensure people that do not use CAVs are not journeys to walking, cycling or public transport.
disadvantaged by their uptake The policies and interventions set out in this plan
enable and encourage the increased use of more
l Potential unemployment impacts because of
sustainable and active modes of travel.
less demand for drivers (e.g. for taxis, deliveries,
buses) To influence the demand of drivers on the transport
network who have alternative ways to travel,
l App based MaaS products should provide
there is a need to consider the implementation
authorities with data obtained to maximise the
of demand management measures, which will be
benefits. For example, a condition of licencing
determined by the appropriate authority. Measures
Uber taxis could include a requirement to
to influence demand could include:
openly provide travel data.
l Management of parking provision, such as
There will be many different players involved in
increasing or introducing charging, and waiting
developing, promoting and ownership of CAVs.
restrictions
The technology adoption is likely to be both
incremental, with small upgrades to existing l Re-allocation of road space to sustainable
technologies, as well as more disruptive with transport modes
offers made by new technology players (such as
the launch of Google or Apple), where residents l Road user charging, such as charging to drive
will be offered completely new products. It will be into or through specific areas where alternatives
important to watch developments closely and be to driving are available with the revenue
able to respond to changing technology to optimise reinvested in public transport, cycling and
outcomes in line with this plan. walking

We will produce a strategy on CAVs and MaaS l Workplace Parking Levy with the revenue
that clearly sets out our position and how we can reinvested in public transport, cycling and
harness technology to deliver our objectives. walking

We will set up a technology consortium, involving
the private sector, to oversee how this technology
is introduced.

67
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

The JLTP4 sets out objectives that seek to address improve accessibility around the West of England.
poor air quality and take action against climate
change yet the presence in the document of some JLTP4 promotes a balanced transport network
major schemes that involve constructing new where each mode of transport plays a role in
road infrastructure could be seen as contradictory providing connectivity. That is why constructing
to this. As such, it is important to clarify the new multimodal links forms part of our overall
principles for new road construction as part of a package of transport measures, enabling the
wider package of measures to improve efficient reallocation of roadspace to more efficient travel
movement around the West of England and choices wherever possible and ensuring that
manage growth. people are able to move around the network safely,
efficiently and as sustainably as possible. If a new
We know that the levels of car traffic and freight transport link is required, we will need to reduce
are high and that current travel habits need to exposure of people to environmental pollutants
change in order to accommodate the growth that such as noise and air pollution, in order to reduce
will be seen across our region. We also know the harmful effects of additional road usage or
that this growth is needed to continue to support upgrading local and strategic road networks.
our economy and that even the most sustainable
growth may create some car and freight trips. Wherever possible, we will look to reallocate
road space to modes of transport that carry
We must start planning how we can move people more efficiently. This can be achieved by
more people in more efficient ways in order to converting a lane for general traffic into a bus
help tackle congestion and therefore meet our lane or cycle lane. This approach makes buses
objective to address air quality and take action more reliable and cycling safer, reduces capacity
on the climate emergencies we have declared. for general traffic and, as a result, can make
Public transport and bikes carry more people with driving on the most congested corridors the least
less demand on road space than cars carrying attractive option in terms of journey time. This
individual people. But in order to ensure cycling is will encourage private car users to switch to
safe and buses are not caught in congestion, we alternative modes.
need to provide infrastructure for this, and existing
road space is not enough. Street space

bicycles

bus passengers
Our approach for new infrastructure in the cars
West of England is to balance the needs of the
environment, our existing communities’ health,
inequalities and their need to travel, and the
economy. This will require developers to mitigate
the traffic impact from developments and
will enable significant progress to be made in
combatting poor air quality and addressing our
climate emergencies.
This approach will also help us to manage
congestion and work towards reallocating space
on existing roads to more sustainable modes of
transport. Road space is finite and we must make
the most efficient use of it as possible in order to

68
March 2020

Parking controls can encourage trips within are unable to use alternatives modes of travel to
urban areas to transfer to active modes or public access urban areas.
transport. By reducing commuter parking in town
and city centres, local economies can be improved Through the development of local parking
by increasing the turnover of the limited number strategies, we will continue to manage parking to
of spaces that are available. The above parking control future traffic demand, including policies
controls will allow progress towards the West for on-street parking, off-street parking and
of England becoming carbon neutral by 2030 residential parking schemes where appropriate.
and also improving air quality. The potential for The design and location of new developments and
emerging technology in improving car park and at workplaces, as well as the numbers of spaces,
kerb management will be considered through, will help to manage demand and reduce the
for example, the reservation of on-street parking dependency on the private car. All day parking will
spaces (including EV charging points). Parking be controlled in a way to discourage users who
policies will continue to accommodate those who could transfer to lower carbon travel choices.

Case study: Improved parking management
in B&NES
The issue of car parking is a complex and, multi- of realistic alternatives such as improvements
faceted issue and has become an increasingly to public transport services.
important aspect of both transport and land
Bath and North East Somerset Council have
use planning. As such it must be integrated
recently adopted a parking Strategy for the
and coordinated with the various other aspects
district that sets out a long-term plan for
of urban policy in order to effectively manage
managing parking across Bath & North East
levels of demand. This is necessary in order to
Somerset. This is part of a package of transport
promote and support:
improvements to help meet rising demand and
• Lifestyles that are less car dependent reduce the impact of traffic on local people and
• Development that is more sustainable in the historic fabric of Bath as a World Heritage
terms of air quality site. The parking strategy helps improve the
• Transport provision that is more socially quality of life of the people of Bath and North
inclusive East Somerset by establishing a balance
between the social, economic, cultural and
• Places that are more attractive and user- environmental needs of the whole community. In
friendly particular, the
Control over the availability of parking spaces is The Parking Strategy supports the need to
a key tool in limiting car trips, and is presently reduce the level of intrusion of vehicles into
the most readily available and widely accepted urban centres, reflecting concerns about the
method of managing demand. It has been impact of traffic congestion on the environment
proven that strict control over public parking and air quality, as well as the need to protect the
can have a major impact in terms of travel historic fabric of the World Heritage Site in Bath.
choice especially when linked to the provision

69
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

Road user charging and Workplace Parking Levies Funds raised through charging schemes would
can manage the demand of private cars on the be reinvested in sustainable transport measures
highway network with the revenue generated across the West of England, to improve the
reinvested in public transport, cycling and provision of realistic alternatives to the use
walking. Extensive feasibility and consultation of the private car. More details on charging
work, including with the public and businesses, schemes can be found in Section 10: Funding and
would form part of any further consideration of implementation.
demand management measures, including a road
user charging scheme. As part of any scheme The West of England authorities will continue to
development, assessments would be undertaken to work together to identify and agree a coordinated
ensure that charging would not result in creating a approach to parking and/or road user charging, to
barrier to employment or education opportunities, manage the impact on competing commercial and
particularly for those who are unemployed or business centres.
on low income. Those with disabilities and other Feasibility studies have been carried out to
mobility impairments will be considered for investigate the impacts and extent of charging in
exemptions. Work would be also required with Clean Air Zones in Bath and Bristol (see Section 8:
partners within and beyond the West of England, Local connectivity). Final plans are likely to include
including Highways England. As the SRN will fall introducing charges or restrictions for the most
outside any fiscal control, care will need to be polluting vehicles entering these areas. This could
taken in establishing such a scheme to address any help contribute towards improving air quality in
unintended consequences for the remainder of the our most congested areas. However, as with all
highway network, including the SRN and its impact schemes that seek to charge users of the transport
on business. network, significant objection is often generated,
A Workplace Parking Levy means employers are which will need to be carefully managed.
charged a fee per private parking space on their We will support ongoing work on Clean Air Zones,
site. Employers may choose to pass this charge on and proactively work to manage objections.
to their staff, which can encourage staff to consider
alternative ways of travelling to work. Previous
assessments undertaken for the West of England
show there is potential for a Workplace Parking
Levy to deliver an estimated 2% reduction in trips.
Coupled with a road user charging scheme, the
impact on the reduction of trips could be far more
significant.
We will support the further investigation and
potential future implementation of appropriate
parking and road user charging policies, if initial
consultation and feasibility work suggests they
could influence and better manage the demand
and impact the use of private vehicles in the West
of England.

70
March 2020

W4. Improve resilience of the network, traffic volumes, network constraints, air quality and
providing increased reliability Clean Air Zone proposals.

Support
Support sustainable
sustainable and and inclusive
inclusive economic growth (EG) £ or £ or of
graph graph of arrows increasing
arrows
graphincreasing
The definition of the KRN will need to take account
andeconomic
inclusivegrowth (EG)growth

of principles around how movements should be
Support sustainable economic (EG) £ or of arrows increasing
equal sign or open doorgraph of arrows increasing

This policy contributes towards the delivery
Enable equality and improve
Support accessibility
sustainable and(EA)
inclusive or£ or
Enable equality andequality
Enable improve accessibility
and improve (EA)
accessibility (EA) economic growthequal(EG)
sign or open
equal door
sign open door
thermometer/cloudequal sign or open door
Address poor air quality
Enable and take
equality action against climate change (CC)
Address poor air
Addressquality
poor and take action
air quality and and
takeimprove
against accessibility
climate
action change
against (EA)
(CC)
climate thermometer/cloud
change (CC)
heart
thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better health,
Address wellbeing, safety and security (H) heart (CC) thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better
Contributehealth,
to better health,air
poor
wellbeing, safety andand
quality
wellbeing, action
takeand
security
safety (H) against
security climate
(H)heart change
google pin/ tree/sunshine
Create better places (BP) pin/ heart

accommodated and managed on the local network.
Create better places
Create Contribute
(BP)places
better (BP)to better health, wellbeing, safety and security
google pin/(H)
tree/sunshine
google tree/sunshine

of the following objectives and outcomes:
Create better places (BP) google pin/ tree/sunshine

This represents an opportunity for a fresh approach
to the designation of corridors, and take account of
the following issues as part of scheme design:
1,2,4,5 4 2,3 3
l The accommodation of strategic car and lorry
movements on the most appropriate, defined
The main interventions that will support the corridors, to ensure efficient movement and to
delivery of the policy, are: minimise congestion and inform a designated
freight distribution network (see policy W5). This
l Define, manage and maintain the Key Route may include the omission of some corridors
Network which have a current `A’ road designation, and
the inclusion of others currently not designated
l Develop and improve network resilience
as `A’ roads
through an ongoing commitment to highway
maintenance l The designation and status of priority public
transport corridors, including the potential to
l Effectively manage the Major Road Network
review the status of existing corridors in terms
l Effectively accommodate development sites and of accommodating through traffic movements
associated trips and re-prioritise road space to more sustainable
modes
Define, manage and maintain the Key Route l The appropriate balance and allocation of road
Network space between different modes of passenger
The West of England Combined Authority has a duty transport, and the balance of links based on
to define a Key Route Network (KRN) within its area. their urban or rural environment and position
The KRN will clarify a priority highway network for within district centres
the accommodation of multimodal, passenger and l Impact on air quality, particularly routes within
freight movements, help guide the prioritisation of Air Quality Management Areas (AQMA) and any
investment in the highway (including maintenance) forthcoming, designated Clean Air Zones
and complement the transport major scheme
programme. l Road safety implications, particularly for
vulnerable road users (including taking account
Consideration is being given to the criteria for of designated 20 mph zones)
the KRN and its implementation and operational
protocols, including the multimodal nature of l Supply and management of parking and
transport corridors (road, freight, port, airport, servicing of kerbside properties
bus, metrobus, cycle and rail), key transport
interchanges, major employment and housing
areas, key movements of people and commuters,

71
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

l The JLTP4’s major scheme programme, Develop and improve network resilience
including the linkages between radial and through an ongoing commitment to highway
orbital links and opportunities to reallocate road maintenance
space, and manage/restrict through traffic, on
radial routes where through traffic is diverted A significant proportion of our total capital and
away onto more appropriate roads revenue spending is allocated to managing and
maintaining our transport assets ranging from
l Interaction with and inclusion of the MRN, and carriageways, footways, cycleways and rights
connections to the SRN and the rest of the local of way, to bridges, retaining walls, fences and
road network barriers, verges, lighting, traffic signals, bus stops
The issue of wider connectivity will also be and other public transport infrastructure, street
considered in the designation of the KRN. The West furniture and signage, car parks and Park & Ride
of England network accommodates strategic car sites and drainage infrastructure.
and freight movements between the south coast Growth in traffic levels has brought an increasingly
ports and the Midlands, as well as movements widespread recognition of the importance of
from the South West Peninsula and South Wales highway maintenance, and the high value placed
to London. These movements are not only on it both by users and the wider community.
accommodated by the SRN but also on roads of a The impact of repairs and the need to access
more local nature. The major scheme programme and maintain underground utilities beneath
includes improvements to take account of these the highway has a detrimental impact on traffic
movements, to improve network efficiency, tackle disruption. There is significant public concern
bottlenecks and remove strategic movements from about the need to invest adequately and effectively
unsuitable routes. in highway maintenance and the implications for
A further key issue is resilience. Capacity is safety and journey reliability.
limited and an incident on the SRN can have To manage the network effectively we will:
severe implications across the region (and often
much further afield), for private vehicles, public l Oversee the safe, effective and efficient use of
transport and freight movements, as well as the network in line with our duties under the
having further road safety, economic and air quality 2004 Traffic Management Act and consider the
implications as traffic is diverted onto unsuitable needs of all road users
or congested links. One particular example is the l Review our network management plans
M5 through North Somerset, where incidents, to ensure they are kept up-to-date and
particularly in the busy summer months, have complementary
severe implications. This causes severe congestion,
not just on the motorway but also on diversion l Review road hierarchy through the KRN
routes and local roads in and between our towns. programme to consider which kinds of traffic
Resilience will form a key component in the should be directed onto the most appropriate
designation of the KRN, as well as informing the routes, including heavy goods vehicles
major scheme programme.
l Adapt the network through engineering
We will define, manage and maintain the KRN, schemes and measures to ease congestion,
ensuring it considers the key issues of wider improve safety and encourage sustainable
connectivity and resilience. transport modes

72
March 2020

l Maximise the operational effectiveness of traffic A Joint Transport Asset Management Plan (JTAMP)
signals and extend the use of Urban Traffic sets out a framework for the delivery of sustainable
Control where deemed appropriate maintenance. This could form the framework for
the management of the transport infrastructure
l Maintain, manage and ensure best use of asset base to deliver agreed Levels of Service and
transport assets through a Joint Transport Performance Management targets in the most
Asset Management Plan. This will include those cost-effective way. The JTAMP could consider the
key routes and corridors that form the KRN following sorts of issues:
l Develop and improve the network resilience, l Customer Care: to involve stakeholders and
taking account of the impact of climate change communities and users of the highway network
l Explore further with Highways England a to confirm how best to deliver their needs
strategy for the M32, which will consider l Asset Information Management: establish
options including declassification from inventory systems and procedures to collect
motorway status and potentially unlock a new and collate asset characteristics and condition
Park & Ride site along the M32 corridor assessments
l Continue our firm commitment to maintain the l Transport Asset Management Framework:
network to the best standard possible, in light implement a clear and focused Plan, compliant
of increasingly constrained budgets for highway with statutory obligations, defining clear
maintenance. This includes the ‘whole-life’ highway maintenance objectives and outcomes
approach where we identify and repair roads and detailing `Life Cycle’ planning, to ensure the
before they are visibly damaged on the surface, most effective use and targeted maintenance
wherever there is a financial or a maintenance of the asset over its operating life up to
benefit incentive to do so renewal/disposal. This will include appropriate
We are committed to better integrating traffic consideration of both reactive and planned
control systems across the region, and working maintenance, at various stages throughout
with technology partners to better share network its life cycle. Consideration will be given to
data and identify ways to manage the network. available funding and establish/maintain
contingency plans for unplanned events and
We will implement the measures identified as emergencies
part of the Better Bus Area scheme to coordinate
and rationalise the information provided to bus l Work Planning and Service Delivery: adopt a
operators in respect of planned road works. policy for sustainable development compatible
with predicted growth and planning for
To fulfil its potential, it is crucial the highway resilience. Identify maintenance implications
network is well maintained. This can make a arising from new and improved infrastructure
significant contribution to key transport objectives, projects and plan future maintenance,
for example road safety, particularly with respect implement/maintain an effective process of risk
to cyclists, pedestrians and motorcyclists. Equally, management and deliver an effective system of
a poorly maintained highway network can deter inspection
people from choosing active modes of travel,
therefore increasing levels of congestion and be
detrimental to the quality of the public realm.

73
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

l Use of new street works powers (including the
New Roads and Streetworks Act and the Traffic
Management Act) to improve the management of
Case Study: Cribbs Patchway New
works on the highway network
Neighbourhood Infrastructure Development
We will look to produce a JTAMP for the West of Plan
England area to provide a framework for delivering Part of the Cribbs Patchway New
sustainable maintenance. Neighbourhood Infrastructure Plan includes
a commitment from South Gloucestershire
Effectively manage the Major Road Network Council to forward fund up to £12m to ensure
that infrastructure is comprehensively
The Department for Transport is designating a planned, phased and delivered. This
Major Road Network (MRN) to sit between the demonstrates the Council’s commitment
Strategic Road Network (SRN) and the local in ensuring that the right infrastructure is
road network. It will provide the opportunity for available at the right time to allow people to
a consistent and coherent network with a better make more sustainable travel choices.
balance of investment between the SRN and
MRN and clarify their complementary roles and
requirements.
Effectively accommodate development sites and
To give the economy a stronger boost, unlock associated trips
housing and relieve communities overwhelmed
with traffic, there is a strong case for increasing We engage with developers early in the planning
investment on important roads managed by local process to ensure they design their sites to match
authorities. Our approach to the MRN will, therefore, the priorities of the local planning authorities and
take into account the emerging KRN proposals and contribute proportionately to identified transport
principles, as well as future growth locations for improvements and mitigations. This includes the
housing and jobs and include key urban corridors. provision of highway links into the existing network.
Public transport will be one of the key principles Regular update meetings with developers of
for the MRN, as these roads carry large numbers of strategic sites give the West of England authorities
people on buses and other modes. the chance to outline transport network priorities
and requirements through site design and help
This recognises that public transport schemes to iron out issues to ensure a smooth planning
are generally more effective in the long-term at process.
reducing congestion than road widening schemes.
Resilience schemes will be included where they It is essential that potential transport opportunities
have a demonstrable beneficial impact for the are used to influence decision making at the very
economy. earliest stages of land use development planning
(see Section 9: Neighbourhood Connectivity).
We recognise that there will be additional MRN
capital infrastructure and this will have an impact Accessibility – with an emphasis on developments
upon maintenance budgets and requirements. being encouraged in areas served by, or providing
greatest opportunity for, trips to be made by
The West of England will work closely with the passenger transport, walking and cycling – will
Department for Transport on proposals for the continue to be balanced with the need to deliver
MRN in our area. wider objectives. This could include supporting

74
March 2020

growth on strategic transport corridors or
addressing local issues.
S106 contributions and Community Case study: South East Bristol Orbital
Infrastructure Levy (CIL) will continue to be Low Carbon Corridor
used to fund the delivery of mitigations and The JTS identified that there is poor infrastructure
improvements as soon as possible. Site-specific and public transport service facilitating orbital
mitigations will be via the S106 process and movements around south east Bristol and the
the more strategic improvements via CIL. surrounding area. The lack of any orbital connection
Transport assessments will outline the effects is forcing people to drive along the A4 and use
of medium & major development sites on the unsuitable local roads in residential areas. This adds
local transport network and idenitfy mitigations, more traffic to the already heavily congested A4.
to be funded by developers. These assessments This makes it more difficult to reallocate road space
will include testing the effect of development- to transformational and sustainable modes such as
caused car use and expected travel patterns Mass Transit and other low carbon travel options.
on nearby rural transport networks, with It also results in high flows and congestion on the
mitigations to allieviate and discourage extra Bath Road, A4174 West Town Lane, A37 Wells Road,
trips on inappropriate routes in sensitive areas. Whitchurch Village, Queen Charlton and Keynsham.
Given the evidence from the JTS, the focus Options were considered as part of the B&NES
of the JLTP4 is on achieving a substantial Local Plan consultation. Officers across the West of
shift to more sustainable modes, that carry England have met with residents and the community
more people more efficiently. However, large to go through various alternative options and have
numbers of cars will remain on the network taken ideas and comments away to develop in more
given the planned growth across the region. detail when further work on the corridor progresses.
Significant investment will be required to: Further detailed engagement and consultation will
continue with the residents of South East Bristol and
l Unlock new development, including strategic
Whitchurch Village to explore options that address
employment locations and clusters
the lack of orbital connectivity, developing plans
l Tackle congestion blackspots that are suitable, deliverable and acceptable to the
community. We are committed to addressing the
l Support the ambitions for changing orbital connectivity issue. Our first priority will be to
people’s travel behaviour, through enabling do so through public transport, cycling and walking
reallocation of road space to walking, through a step change in sustainable transport
cycling and public transport on congested provision.
urban corridors and directing traffic to more
suitable corridors, where appropriate Comments received through the JLTP4 consultation
raised concerns that residents felt that plans are well
We will design new and improved road developed, however only initial modelling options
infrastructure to support the needs of have been assessed at this stage and we have much
pedestrians, cyclists and public transport more to do, in consultation with the local community,
users – including multimodal transport to develop the plans and any future alternative
corridors – to support the ambitious growth infrastructure solutions further.
proposals in the area and to unlock the
economic potential of areas including South
Bristol.

75
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

Case study: Banwell Bypass
The Banwell Bypass has recently won funding alone when HGVs, coaches and school buses
from the Ministry of Housing, Communities meet. As a result, air quality is poor and the
& Local Government through the Housing perceived safety of pedestrians and cyclists
Infrastructure Fund (HIF) to build a bypass to even worse. Congestion has been a problem for
the north of the historic village of Banwell. decades with moderate worsening of queueing
over the past 15 years. All of this has limited the
The bypass has been a long-standing aspiration economic and social vitality of the village centre.
of North Somerset Council and until now, years
of local campaigning had been unable to secure The bypass will provide numerous benefits,
the funding required to deliver this major quality including providing significant improvements
of life improvement for Banwell which sits at to air quality and public realm in the centre of
the foothills of the Mendips Area of Outstanding the village, improved access to the residential
Natural Beauty (AONB). and employment growth to the north-west of
the village, supporting the delivery of Weston
The bypass, which will pass to the north of Villages; and improving local and regional
Banwell village, will link the A371 and A368. connectivity for longer trips. The bypass will
These two A roads currently meet in the narrow also enable pedestrian improvements in the
village centre, in the heart of the Banwell centre of the village, helping to promote more
Conservation Area. The historic narrow streets sustainable modes of transport wherever
of West Street, East Street and Church Street possible, improving accessibility and the quality
are inappropriate and are of insufficient widths of life for Banwell residents.
to accommodate cars passing each other, let

We will work to ensure that all highway Strategic Road Network and locally will improve
improvement and traffic management schemes access to potential housing & residential growth.
consider potential improvements to bus
infrastructure and incorporate features in design, We will work with Highways England to deliver
wherever possible. improvements to Junction 14 of the M5, increasing
capacity and enabling enhanced access to national
We will work with Highways England to provide networks.
a new Junction 21A on the M5 motorway south of
the existing J21. This will be supported by a new We will deliver a new road link from Yate to a new
multimodal corridor connecting the new junction M4 Junction 18A, to enable traffic from Yate to
with the A38, with a bypass for Banwell in the directly access Emersons Green and the east of
short to medium term and potential highway Bristol.
improvements at Sandford and Churchill in the
medium/long term. Major improvements to the A38
between Langford and South Bristol will further
improve connectivity. The scheme will improve
links to the airport and improve resilience of the

76
March 2020

We will deliver the following highway schemes Support the delivery of Enterprise Zones/
to provide access to new development sites and business clustering
accommodate associated vehicle trips:
The clustering of businesses can have a number
l Multimodal corridor improvement (highway, of proven benefits, including trade and business
metrobus, strategic cycling route) between between them improving, due to reduced transport
Bristol and Nailsea, continuing to Clevedon/M5 costs and more immediate supply of goods or
service. It is also more convenient for customers
l A4 to Avon Mill Lane improvements, Keynsham
travelling to businesses or services to be able to
l Winterbourne and Frampton Cotterell Bypass, access multiple services on one site. Increased
to enable road space reallocation to provide a business through footfall is normally higher when
multimodal corridor along the A432 between businesses cluster too, with impulse buying far
Yate and the North Fringe of Bristol greater.
l A371 and Wolvershill Road/Churchland Way These benefits can have significant positives for
Link (North South Spine Road), Weston-super- the transport network and public realm. Reduced
Mare travel distances between businesses result in a
lower demand for trips on the transport network
l Herluin Way to Locking Road Link, Weston- for both freight and delivery journeys, as well
super-Mare (to replace two current road as staff and customers. The potential lower
bridges with a single one and enable double- demand on the transport network can, in turn,
tracking of the railway) improve connectivity by improving journey times,
congestion and air quality. It can also result in a
W5. Enable business clustering and the higher demand for public transport services to
efficient movement of freight serve large employment sites, boosting public
transport usage. Schemes to improve walking and
Support sustainable and inclusive
Support

This policy contributes towards the delivery
equality and
improve
Enable
Enable equality and
Address poor airAddress
quality and
Enable
poortake
air
Address
and Support
inclusive
sustainable
economic
Support
sustainable
equality
improve
accessibility (EA)
actionpoor
quality and
growthand
Enable
economic
sustainable
(EG)

action
climate
inclusive
accessibility
and
take
air
Address
against
equality
improve
quality
growth
Support
Enable
poorand
(EA)
air
and
against
change
take
Address
economic
and
improve
(EG)
inclusive
sustainable
accessibilityequal
(EA)
equality and
take
andair
climate
action
(CC)
quality
poor
graph
£ orgrowth
improve
of

(CC)
climate
action
change
against
economic
and
sign
accessibility
quality
inclusive
or(EA)
thermometer/cloud
and
arrows
(EG) £ or graph
growth
open
increasing
(EG)
economic
equal sign or
door
accessibility
take (CC)
climate
change
against action
growth
(EA)equaldoor
change
against
or graph
arrows
of £
open
thermometer/cloud
(EG)

(CC)
climate
of£ or
increasing
sign orequal
thermometer/cloud
arrows
graph of
opensign
increasing
arrows
dooror open
thermometer/cloud
change (CC)
£ or increasing
graph of
equaldoor
arrows increasing
sign or open door
thermometer/cloud
cycling access are also more effective when linking
to employment clusters.
Contribute to better
Contribute
health,to better
wellbeing,
Contribute
health,
safety
to better
Contribute
wellbeing,
and health,
ecurity
tosafety
better health,
wellbeing,
(H)and
Contribute to heart
security
safety
wellbeing,
(H)
better and security
safety
health, heart
and
(H) security
wellbeing, heartsecurityheart
safety(H)
and (H) heart

of the following objectives and outcomes:
Create better places
Create better
Create(BP)
better places
(BP) places (BP)
(BP) Create
placesbetter
Create google
better places (BP)pin/ google pin/
tree/sunshine google pin/
tree/sunshine pin/
tree/sunshine
google tree/sunshine
google pin/ tree/sunshine

Business clustering offers significant benefit
to local communities as they consolidate
1,2,3,6 1,5 1-5 3,4 2,3 infrastructure, unlock key development sites,
attract business and create jobs. Business rates
collected from these clusters can be used by local
The main interventions that will support the enterprise partnerships or planning authorities to
delivery of the policy, are: reinvest in the local economy and infrastructure.

l Support the delivery of Enterprise Zones/ To strengthen existing multi-business sites or to
business clustering encourage further clustering, business clusters
can be formalised as Enterprise Areas (EAs) or
l Balance the requirement for distributing goods, Enterprise Zones (EZs). The West of England
with mitigating the adverse impact of vehicles actively promotes designated EAs/EZs across
the region, including at Avonmouth/Severnside,
Bath City Riverside, Somer Valley, Bristol Temple
Quarter, Emersons Green, Filton, J21 (Weston-
super-Mare) and at South Bristol. There are also

77
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

Case Study: Avonmouth/Severnside Enterprise
Area (ASEA)
The ASEA, at 650 hectares, is the largest in the pipeline to come forward within the next
brownfield industrial development site in few years, and space for another 5 million sq ft
Western Europe. It is located between Bristol to follow on.
and the River Severn, immediately adjacent to
the M5 and M49 motorways and consists of two Commuting by workers to ASEA is
main areas of economic activity – Avonmouth predominantly by car for a number of reasons.
to the south within the Bristol boundary The nature of large amounts of the business
and Severnside to the north in the South uses requires 24-hour work and therefore
Gloucestershire boundary. In Avonmouth, over workers are on shift patterns that are often out
£400 million has been invested in the Port of of the usual business hours. As such, access by
Bristol in recent years and it is the closest port public transport services is often not realistic
to the main centres of UK population, with 45 due to levels of services out of usual business
million people (over 70% of the UK population) hours. ASEA is geographically close to Lawrence
living within a radius of 300 kilometres. Royal Weston, a socially deprived neighbourhood
Portbury Dock is a key component of the wider that has high levels of unemployment, however
port in Bristol, handling ships of up to 130,000 the transport links between the two areas are
tonnes deadweight and is conveniently linked poor and unsafe. Currently the only realistic
by motorway and rail routes. In addition, Bristol access is by car, ownership of which is less
Airport is in close proximity, connecting the likely for those who are unemployed. Despite
sub-region to North America, Europe, the Middle being conveniently linked to motorway and rail
East, Asia and Africa. routes, congestion and capacity problems cause
connectivity issues.
ASEA is particularly well suited to large scale
warehousing, storage and logistics use with The removal of the Severn Bridge tolls and
an open planning consent in place over a the opening of the new junction from the M49,
large proportion of the area that encourages will leave fewer barriers to travel by car to
development to come forward quickly and easily. ASEA from South Wales. Whilst this opens up
Highways England are delivering a new junction opportunities for a new labour market to access
from the M49 that will provide direct access into the jobs that are expanding in the area, it also
the heart of the development area. Recently a increases the opportunity for more people to
number of large scale distribution operations drive from further afield, increasing the number
have come forward creating over 5 million sq ft of vehicles accessing the area and therefore
of Regional Distribution Centre floorspace. There increasing the negative impacts of congestion.
is another 2 million sq ft of logistics floorspace

78
March 2020

multiple priority growth locations across the
region, offering further opportunities for clustering.
EZs are areas designated for businesses to locate Case Study: Temple Quarter
to, encouraged by a range of measures to make it Enterprise Zone (TQEZ)
more attractive for business, such as tax breaks or TQEZ is at the heart of Bristol City Centre,
business rate discounts. The process for applying adjacent to Bristol Temple Meads rail station.
for planning permission is normally simplified if The adjacent area of St Philips Marsh is
businesses apply to locate to a designated EZ. well established as an industrial estate. The
EZs in the region will act as significant traffic vision is to create a new quarter of the city
generators, in terms of freight and employees, and centre for working, living and leisure and has
have different needs and impacts on the transport attracted many digital and creative industries,
network in the West of England. We are working and is home to the enterprise hub at the
with both sites to ensure sustainable economic Engine Shed.
growth can be achieved.
There is a target to provide 22,000 jobs within
We will develop a joint strategy for movement the TQEZ over the lifetime of this plan. Major
in the Avonmouth/Severnside Enterprise Area investment has been made in transport
that ensures it develops to the benefit of the infrastructure to enable movement to the
West of England, supporting freight, workers and TQEZ by sustainable modes from across the
associated access requirements. West of England, providing opportunities of
employment and enterprise for our residents.
Balance the requirement for distributing Freight movement around the TQEZ is
goods, with mitigating the adverse impact currently mixed, due to the industrial sites
of vehicles in St Philips Marsh, which generates HGV
Road freight is the most common way to distribute movements, and the contrasting digital
goods in the West of England. However, congestion technology sector in the TQEZ, which
on the network results in unreliability and generates fewer HGV movements but still
delivery problems and impacts on other users of experiences high levels of small deliveries
the network. We need to effectively manage the in vans. With limited options to bypass
movement of freight, encouraging a shift from Bristol City Centre, the TQEZ experiences
partially filled, heavily polluting road vehicles to high volumes of through traffic, including
fewer, fuller, cleaner vehicles and seek to transfer freight vehicles, adding to an already heavily
road freight to alternative methods such as rail and congested network in Bristol city centre. The
water. vision for the TQEZ is to be sustainable in
its operation, including seeking new ways to
We will progress an ambitious programme to reduce the impact of freight movement.
improve the efficiency, and reduce the impact, of
freight movements and produce a Freight Strategy
for the West of England.

79
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

There are several key areas of intervention.

Routing, management and information
Case Study: Intercity Rail Freight
A designated core network of preferred freight
routes will be developed in partnership with Passenger trains can be used to transport
operators, through the establishment of a Strategic freight between cities. Benefits include fast
Freight Network. Through this, freight will be and reliable services, sustainable onward
proactively managed on the highway network, in a travel options from rail stations, running to a
way that minimises impacts on local communities timetable making first/last mile integration
and other road users. Operators will be encouraged easier, and carbon reduction by reducing
to use HGV satellite navigation systems and highway freight movements.
consider more off-peak movements, including for
refuse vehicles. Highway Authorities will seek to
maintain clear signage, provide better enforcement linked to the Freight Consolidation Centre, offering
of suitable routes and weight restrictions. good access to rail and motorway networks.
We will seek to establish a Strategic Freight Improvements to the loading gauge on our core
Network to better manage freight movements. rail routes to increase rail freight capacity, by
increasing the number of containers that can be
To improve air quality, reduce carbon and create
accommodated on freight train paths, is supported.
better places in central areas and certain corridors,
The potential to use passenger trains to carry freight
traffic movement restrictions will be sought in
and improve options for first and last mile logistics
some areas, including through measures in any
from rail stations, will be investigated including the
forthcoming Clean Air Zones. Access could be
rail served former waste terminal at Westmoreland
provided to a group of streets, or zone, from a small
Road (Bath), Barrow Road (Bristol) and a passenger
number of access points.
train freight pilot at Bristol Temple Meads.
We will seek to restrict through traffic movement
We will work with Network Rail to investigate
for heavy vehicles and most polluting goods
further movement of freight by rail and improve
vehicles in the central areas of Bristol and Bath.
options for first and last mile logistics from
Currently the M4 has two bridges with restrictions stations.
close to Junction 19, which results in vehicles
Network Rail’s proposals for loading gauge
diverting onto the Bristol Ring Road and the A420
enhancements to W10/W12 Didcot to Cardiff and
through Wick, to rejoin at Junction 18.
W8 Bradford-on-Avon to Bathampton Junction are
We will work with HE to address restrictions supported.
affecting the carriage of abnormal indivisible loads.
The water courses throughout the West of England
Rail and water could offer the potential to carry freight, with electric
vehicles or cargo bikes connecting to city centre
To reduce the impact of freight on the already
locations for the first and last mile. This could offer
congested highway network, work is required to
opportunities for cleaner and less disruptive forms
encourage a shift for a range of goods from road to
of freight delivery.
rail and water.
We will work with partners, including freight
The creation of a multimodal freight distribution
operators and waterway authorities, to investigate
centre in the Avonmouth area will be investigated,
the potential of using waterways to carry freight
80
March 2020

Case Study: Virtual loading bays Case Study: Consolidation hubs
Virtual loading bays can provide a solution to The rise in ecommerce has resulted in an
manage kerb space. Spaces where loading increase in the movement of light goods
is normally prohibited can be reserved in vehicles to homes. We want to reduce
advance, enabling the authority to prepare their impact by providing localised places
traffic management for the space to be used where parcels can be dropped to allow
at a specific time, for a specified period. This customers to walk or cycle to collect
enables vehicles to get as close as possible them, without the requirement for light
to delivery points, reduces congestion and goods vehicles to circulate our residential
smooths traffic flows, as the driver knows areas. This can be easily introduced to new
exactly where to park on arrival. developments, where the consolidation hub
for residents’ parcels can be incorporated
into the masterplan from the outset. We are
and use of electric or cargo bikes in town and city beginning to see a rise in parcel collection/
centres. drop off points located in local shops and
transport interchanges, therefore it is also
Loading and parking possible to provide localised parcel hubs in
Pedestrian movements, cycle lanes, route hierarchy established neighbourhoods. By removing
and public transport reliability, including the unnecessary circuitous trips by light goods
management of delivery times on core routes and vehicles, the freight operator becomes
town centre areas and appropriate enforcement, can more productive and the negative impacts
all impact on the ability to efficiently deliver freight. of motorised traffic on our local streets is
reduced.
We will review parking and loading restrictions,
particularly in sensitive areas, ensuring loading By building a network of committed local
bays are suitably located shops and businesses and keeping the cost
to freight companies as low as possible
Consolidation the Dutch city of Nijmegen has developed
The first urban freight consolidation scheme in the a working model for last mile delivery of
UK commenced in Bristol in 2004. The scheme has freight transferring goods at a series of hubs
157 retailers on board removing just over 20,000 to smaller more nimble vehicles and electric
HGV trips from Bristol and Bath since 2011 (DHL cargo bikes in the city centre.
Monthly Review, 2017). Through a grant from the
Office of Low Emission Vehicles (OLEV) as part of the
Go Ultra Low project, we are seeking to enhance the
The challenge is to develop a freight consolidation
freight consolidation offer with micro consolidation
centre that is commercially viable, and can be run
centres, using electric cargo bikes, small electric
at a profit with only a small initial subsidy from the
vans and other appropriate sustainable modes to
public sector. To encourage more efficient movement
serve narrow streets in Bristol and Bath, which are
of freight using fewer, fuller and more appropriate
more appropriate to the environment than larger
vehicles, collaboration with industry, local authority
vehicles.
and further education establishments is required.

81
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 7:
Connectivity within the West of England continued

We will investigate opportunities to either expand
the existing freight consolidation scheme, or
introduce new facilities, to cover urban centres, Case Study: Embracing innovation
by working with industry, local authorities and
further education establishments. Opportunities and impacts from new
connected autonomous vehicle technologies
We will introduce an online resource to advertise are being considered through the ROBOPILOT
spare capacity in vans already travelling to autonomous light commercial vehicle
congested areas to reduce the need for additional project and the CAPRI autonomous POD fleet
vehicles, particularly for smaller retailers or project. South Gloucestershire Council is a
market traders. collaborator in these Innovate UK funded
R&D projects to facilitate demonstrations
Micro-consolidation of freight allows the pooling of autonomous vehicle technology on
together of deliveries into a centre for a small area. our highway network and in campus
Loan cargo bikes for businesses to hire to make environments, respectively. The learning
short deliveries across congested areas will be from these projects can be used to help
investigated, so businesses can trial the scheme inform the council’s own aspirations around
and realise the benefits. The use of rail stations and supporting autonomous technology, in both
Park & Ride sites as delivery hubs for customers to highway and non-highway environments.
collect and return parcels will also be investigated. New modes of transport (especially for first
By coinciding with an already planned journey, mile/last mile) will increasingly utilise such
this would reduce the need for LGVs to travel to technologies, potentially creating more
customers at workplaces/more central locations. efficient, safer and economical ways for
We will work with delivery companies and businesses, visitors and commuters to travel.
transport interchanges to identify options for loan
cargo bikes and freight micro-consolidation.
Construction Management Plans and Delivery
Embracing innovation Management Plans through the planning system
Through our existing and developing partnerships, l For new developments that require a travel
we will be at the forefront of embracing innovation, plan, include a focus on minimising trips for
particularly using lower emission and automated deliveries and servicing to reduce the impact of
freight vehicles. freight activity associated with the operation of
the site, including investigation of consolidation,
We will support emerging technologies for
out-of-hours deliveries and details of loading
improving the efficiency of freight movement,
locations
including planning for and managing the impact
of CAVs and drones. l Require new developments to incorporate good
quality on site loading facilities
Planning conditions
To influence future freight movements, a set of We will develop and apply local planning
planning conditions will be developed to guide local conditions to influence future freight movements.
policies, that:
l Enable a reduction in the negative impacts
of freight in future developments by using

82
March 2020

Section 8:
Local connectivity
Local challenges Local policies and interventions
Car use is very high in many rural and outer urban Local connectivity in the West of England will
areas, as well as certain parts of urban areas, support delivery of the JLTP4 objectives, by
often reflecting the limited travel choices available. focussing on these policies:
Although walking and cycling are relatively popular
compared with other UK cities, many parts of the
l L1: Enable walking and cycling, ‘active modes
network have limited infrastructure facilities. The of travel’, to be the preferred choice for shorter
gradual loss of local shops and services due to journeys
competition from out of town retail and leisure l L2: Reduce the number and severity of
complexes, and e-commerce has reduced the casualties for all road users
number and type of facilities available in many
local communities, meaning many people need l L3: Encourage residents and employees to make
to travel further to access essential services, more sustainable and healthier travel choices
education and employment. l L4: Support opportunities for all sectors of the
Building on the general West of England challenges population to access the services they require,
identified in Section 2, more specific challenges for wherever they live
local connectivity have been identified, as follows: l L5: Support the identification and
l There are heavy flows on roads connecting implementation of measures that will improve
towns, including the A370, A38, A36, A46 and air quality
A432
It should be emphasised, as illustrated in Figure
l Actual and perceived road safety and security 5.2, that interventions for local connectivity are not
concerns influence how people choose to travel limited to L1 to L5 above, as both bus and rail trips
routinely cover local connectivity and their policies
l There is a lack of knowledge and confidence which are covered in Section 7 are also relevant.
around cycling and using public transport
l Local services and transport options are limited
in many rural areas
l There are areas of poor air quality on the
highway network, with AQMAs in central
Bristol and Bath, in some urban areas in South
Gloucestershire, and in some towns and villages
in B&NES

83
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

L1. Enable walking and cycling, ‘active barrier to walking and cycling, discouraging these
modes of travel’, to be the preferred choice active travel modes. Many people are concerned
for shorter journeys by road safety (as a result of the lack of crossing
points), air quality and indirect journeys resulting
Support sustainable and Support
inclusive
sustainable
economic
Support
sustainable
and inclusive
Support economic
sustainable
growthand(EG) (EG)
inclusive
economic
growth
inclusiveand graph
£ orgrowth of
economic(EG) £ or
arrows
growth increasing
graph
(EG) arrows
increasing
graph of
arrows
of£ or
increasing
or graph
arrows
of £ increasing
in long journey times due to the barriers caused
This policy contributes towards the delivery
Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG) £ or graph of arrows increasing

by major roads, such as the M5 at Junction 21 at
Enable equality and
Enable
improve
equality and improve and improve
equality
accessibility
Enable
(EA)
equality
accessibility
Enable Enable improve
accessibility
and
(EA) equal
accessibility
(EA)
equality and sign
improve sign or
door
equal
open
or(EA)
accessibility equaldoor
dooror open
opensign
sign orequal
equaldoor
open
(EA) sign or open door
Address poor airAddress
quality and
poortake
air
Address
quality
actionpoor
against
andAddress
air
take
quality
climate
action against
take
change
poorand
air
Address action
climate
quality
(CC)
poor thermometer/cloud
andair
against
take
change
action
qualityclimate
(CC)
and thermometer/cloud
against
change
take climate
(CC)
action change
against (CC)
climate thermometer/cloud
thermometer/cloud
change (CC) thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better
Contribute
health,to better
wellbeing,
Contribute
health,
safety
to better
Contribute
wellbeing,
and security
health,
tosafety
betterand
health,
wellbeing,
(H)
Contribute to heart
security
safety
wellbeing,
(H)
better and security
safety
health, heart
and
(H) security
wellbeing, safety(H) heart
heartsecurity (H)
and heart

of the following objectives and outcomes:
Create better places
Create(BP)
better places
Create(BP)
betterCreate
placesbetter
(BP) places
Create (BP) google(BP)
pin/ tree/sunshine
google pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ google
tree/sunshine

Weston-super-Mare and at M5 Junction 17 Cribbs
better places pin/ tree/sunshine

Causeway.
Current adopted Local Plans include a set of
2,3 1-5 1-3 1-4 1-4 safeguarded sustainable transport routes, many of
which follow the route of former railway lines. This
network of safeguarded routes, once developed,
The main interventions that will support the will provide safe, convenient and efficient
delivery of the policy, are: infrastructure which encourages and facilitates
walking and cycling, and which minimises reliance
l Provide an attractive, safe and usable walking on, and discourages unnecessary use of private
and cycling network cars, especially for local trips.
l Provide schemes to support the uptake of Off-road routes including the Bristol and Bath
cycling Railway Path and the Strawberry Line, as well as
the on-road Avon Cycleway circular route, are well
Provide an attractive, safe and usable used, playing a part in improving the health and
walking and cycling network well-being of residents while reducing the number
Walking and cycling (including the use of e-bikes) of vehicles on our roads.
can reduce the negative impact of congestion on
the local economy, as they offer the most reliable We will continue to safeguard those sustainable
and consistent journey times. Active travel also transport routes and off-road cycle routes
contributes to increasing physical activity, which identified in the Local Plans for each of the West
has many benefits for both health and wellbeing of England authorities, and will seek to develop
for all ages. To make active modes of travel the these routes as part of a network of sustainable
preferred choice for shorter journeys, work will interurban transport routes.
continue with walking and cycling groups, charities, To encourage citizens to change the way they
and wider sustainable transport supporters to travel from private car to more active modes, there
build on and develop best practice that can be needs to be good quality physical infrastructure
shared across the West of England. connecting key destinations including schools,
We will work with partners, charities and the workplaces, and health facilities.
voluntary sector to develop and implement best The priorities of walking and cycling infrastructure
practice design to make walking and cycling the for the West of England will be shaped by a
preferred choice for shorter journeys. vision for investment in strategic infrastructure
Cycling also has a significant, and growing role to develop walking and cycling packages, public
to play for many journeys, including commuter realm as well as a West of England wide Local
trips, journeys to school, and leisure trips. Major Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan (LCWIP).
roads currently provide a physical and perceived

84
March 2020

An LCWIP consists of a package of walking and network of legible, attractive and safe strategic
cycling routes which are defined using a specific cycle routes in Weston-super-Mare, with a
methodology set out by the Department for focus on east-west routes from Worle and
Transport which identifies routes with a potential Weston Villages into the town centre.
for high usage at a local level of connectivity.
LCWIPs will also set out a programme of
l The North Somerset Coastal Towns Cycle
infrastructure improvements and the scale of Route & Strawberry Line Extension: to provide
investment in the walking and cycling environment a continuous cycle route from the Somerset
that would be required to bring preferred routes coast at Brean, connecting the three North
up to a standard that meets the latest best practice Somerset coastal towns, with onward links to
and is suitable for all users. Interventions will Bristol. This will avoid the severance caused by
be prioritised over the short (typically <3 years), the M5 and also the A370, and will save 4 miles
medium (typically <5 years) and long (typically >5 on the current cycle linkages between Clevedon
years) term. & Weston-super-Mare. In progress are further
linkages from Clevedon to the strategic cycle
We will develop our Local Cycling and Walking network, through the long-standing ambition to
Infrastructure Plan, which will be reviewed on a reopen the former railway line to Yatton Station
regular basis. (with onward rail access) as a shared-use path
(known as the Strawberry Line Extension) and
A suite of other walking and cycling schemes and within Somerset onward segregated cycle
strategies sit alongside the Local Cycling and linkages to Wells in Somerset.
Walking Infrastructure Plan as regional priorities.
They include: l Bath Cycle Network and City Centre Package:
Completion of a continuous and integrated
l Greater Bristol Walking and Cycle Network: network of infrastructure to provide strategic
Strategic cycle routes to comprise key cycle routes, comprising key corridors and
corridors, orbital and cross city routes cross city routes, complemented by improved
as outlined in Bristol Cycle Strategy. This permeability and investment in public realm in
integrated strategic cycle network will connect the city centre.
key destinations across, and adjacent to, the
Bristol urban area, including North and East l Bristol City Centre Movement Strategy: public
Fringes, and connections to Whitchurch and realm enhancements, improvements to the
Long Ashton. This will be supported by better pedestrian network, continuous and integrated
pedestrian facilities to serve the Bristol urban cycle network in Bristol city centre and link
area. with the wider strategic improvements to be
delivered by West of England’s LCWIP.
l Interurban cycle routes: Strategic cycle routes
to Thornbury, Yate and Coalpit Heath from the
North and East Fringes, linking into a network
of routes into Bristol.
l A38 Corridor improvements between
Thornbury and the Bristol boundary.
l Weston-super-Mare Cycling and Walking
Network: Better pedestrian and cycling
facilities to serve the town. Completion of a

85
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

All walking and cycling infrastructure schemes The Sustrans Bike Life study has identified that
will be designed in line with best practice design nearly twice as many men than women cycle at
guidance. This includes mitigations required from least weekly in Bristol, which is a significant gap
the Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA). that needs to be closed. Personal security, feeling
safe and respected in public places are key issues
HRA Mitigation: North Somerset Coastal identified by women. To increase the uptake of
Towns Cycle Route cycling, and particularly enable more women to
The current proposals for the Weston-super-Mare cycle, interventions could include:
to Clevedon section of the North Somerset Towns l Prioritising road safety, with protected, but
Coastal Cycle Route, adjacent to Weston-Super- direct, cycle routes
Mare, shows the route occurs directly adjacent
the Severn Estuary SPA and Ramsar. This could l Addressing all local journeys, including trips to
potentially result in the loss of habitat used by school and work
birds, particularly waders. It is understood that
l Training/engagement programmes to increase
the proposed route is indicative at this stage and
confidence
therefore without further information there is a risk
of an adverse effect on the integrity of the Severn l Reaching out to women’s/parenting groups to
Estuary SPA and Ramsar site. A project level HRA integrate them in new infrastructure planning
would therefore be required to screen the potential
effects of this scheme once further details are Other interventions that could increase the number
available. If an LSE is screened-in during a project of people cycling, include:
level HRA then an Appropriate Assessment should l Focus more on secure storage, at homes
be undertaken. This project level Appropriate (including on-street e.g. hangers), workplaces
Assessment would need to demonstrate that and other destinations
no adverse effects will occur on this European
Site before the scheme is granted permission l Acting to remove perceived barriers to cycling
and allowed to go ahead. The Appropriate
l Encouraging take up of e-bikes
Assessment should include moving the route away
from sensitive habitat used by bird populations We will work with partners to deliver
associated with the estuary. opportunities that support all abilities into cycling,
using the All Ages and Abilities (AAA) cycle
network concept.

86
March 2020

Case Study: Odd Down Cycle Circuit Case Study: Brean Down Way
Following a £600,000 grant from British North Somerset Council opened the first leg
Cycling, B&NES developed a cycle circuit at of its flagship Coastal Towns Cycle Route in
Odd Down in Bath. The 1.5km Closed Road July 2017. The three-mile Uphill to Brean
Cycling Circuit at Odd Down Playing Fields section has been an exemplary example of
opened in April 2013, enabling enthusiasts to working with a very wide range of partners,
learn, train and enjoy cycling without having volunteers and funding sources, and the
to negotiate Bath’s busy roads. Odd Down determination to make a long-held ambition
Cycling Circuit has been specifically designed happen. It was jointly led by North Somerset
to introduce and develop opportunities for Council and national cycling charity,
cyclists to train at all levels, and is one of Greenways and Cycleroutes Ltd. It also
only 17 specific closed road cycling circuits in involved the Environment Agency, Wessex
England. Water, Natural England, Somerset County
Council, Sedgemoor District Council and
their contractors, Brean Parish Council, the
Bidding opportunities for walking and cycling National Trust and landowners.
connectivity schemes often arise at short notice
and require ‘shovel ready’ evidenced based The route continues for three-miles to the
schemes backed up by local support to secure tip of Brean Down, which used to look close
funding. The development of a package of walking to Weston-super-Mare, but the barrier of the
and cycling schemes, which incorporates our River Axe and poor connecting paths meant
LCWIP will put the West of England in a strong holiday makers and residents had to drive,
position to capitalise on any future funding take two buses, or cycle the busy, narrow and
opportunities that arise from Government or new circuitous Accommodation Road, which was
development. also three-miles longer.
We will work with key housing developers, Since the opening of the route in July 2017
employers, education providers and leisure sites up until the end of December 2017, there
from an early stage of planning to ensure that were over 47,000 pedestrian and cycle users
funding for walking and cycling infrastructure on the route. Almost all the active travel
forms part of the design from the outset. This will journeys are new leisure trips, which were
ensure that new developments prioritise walking not possible or desirable before. The route
and cycling. won the Highway Partnership Award at the
Institute of Highway Engineers (IHE) South
Western awards on 10 May 2018.

87
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

Opportunities will be taken to reallocate road space obstructions, and obstacles such as unlicensed
to improve conditions for pedestrians, cyclists street furniture and vehicle parking. An attractive
and equestrians through the provision of safe, network, with consistent surfacing, will be more
direct and well-lit routes. This will be prioritised appealing to those who may use active modes.
in locations where the potential for mode shift is
greatest, or where space is made available because We will work to maintain footpaths and cycleways
of development or redesign. to an acceptable standard.

Transport policies have traditionally focussed The scale of investment in walking and cycling
on predicting future demand to provide capacity infrastructure provides a hook for our combined
(predict and provide). In more recent times this initiatives, addressing the ‘structural’ barriers
could better be described as predict and manage. preventing the wider uptake of active travel
A new approach has been developing which seeks options. Relationships with internal partners,
to decide and provide. There is a finite amount of such as public health and air quality, and external
road space and we need to decide which forms of partners, including the NHS and local sport or
transport are prioritised. active travel organisations, along with public
transport operators, are required to maximise
All walking and cycling infrastructure needs to available funding. Partnership working will
be maintained to a high standard. This includes take place by holding regular and attending
addressing issues such as potholes, which can be engagement and forum events, and creating
particularly hazardous for cyclists. Priority routes consortiums that meet quarterly or bi-annually for
should be free from vegetation and other natural ongoing projects.
We will continue to work collaboratively with
internal teams and in partnership with external
organisations to promote the benefits of cycling to
health and the environment, further encouraging
Case Study: Hambrook Junction
behaviour change.
An innovative Cycling Ambition Fund
scheme has provided a straight through Perceptions of danger are a major factor in
crossing of the A4174 Ring Road for cycle attitudes to cycling, with many people hesitant to
traffic or ‘Parallel signalled cycle crossing’. cycle because of the fear of heavy or fast traffic.
The crossing is separate from the adjacent Fear of injury currently deters many people from
provision for pedestrians and allows cycle making healthy and sustainable travel choices.
traffic to cross the Ring Road in a single
We will improve and increase cycle education and
phase, thereby reducing delays for cyclists.
training for all road users, to reduce cyclists’ fear
It utilises innovative above ground detection
of being injured, and both the perception of risk
of cyclists to trigger a change in the signals.
and incidence of cycle injury.
The new layout provides an important link
to the employment areas and educational
establishments around the ring road, for
the local communities. In March 2016, the
scheme was recognised as an ‘exemplar case
study’ in good practice guidance published by
the DfT.

88
March 2020

Cycle parking needs to accommodate a wide range
of bicycle types, including folding, tandem and
Case Study: Bristol Family bike trailers, and be located where there is natural
Cycling Centre surveillance, wherever possible. This includes
cycle parking at public transport interchanges and
The Bristol Family Cycling Centre (a some bus stops, where parking and hire schemes
partnership for 3 years with British Cycling) provide for onward travel. Other facilities, such
at Hengrove opened in Spring 2016 on the as showers and lockers, can also be provided by
site of the former Whitchurch athletics track. offering grants to match fund inputs made by site
It gives people of all ages and abilities the owners/operators.
chance to ride, or learn to ride, in a traffic-
free environment. The centre provides entry We will work with employment site operators,
level cycling to a new generation of cyclists – education providers and leisure sites to provide
starting with balance bikes of different sizes, advice and guidance about what facilities to
through to 2, 3 and 4 wheelers, companion support cycle parking would work at their site.
bikes, wheel chair bikes and hand-cycles,
making cycling accessible to all. We will continue to provide funding for covered
and secure cycle parking and promote 50% match
There were 12,355 attendances in 2017-2018. funded grants to deliver facilities.
We will seek to increase provision of secure on
Provide schemes to support the uptake of street cycle parking for residents.
cycling National and local events including National Bike
Cycle training can significantly improve confidence, Week, charity sporting events and guided walks
as well as safety. Involving whole families in have a role to play in increasing the uptake of
training together can develop skills which can be cycling and walking.
used for either leisure or school/commuter trips. We will support the wider promotion and
Support of existing cycling training programmes provision of national and community-based cycling
will be continued, wherever possible. and walking activities.
Cycle hire schemes are becoming increasingly Electric bikes have an increasing role to play
important to facilitate and encourage cycling, by enabling sustainable transport for longer
especially for people who do not own, or have journeys, where topography is challenging, and
immediate access, to a bicycle. These schemes for ageing or sedentary populations. The Access
enable residents and visitors to explore with WEST programme currently funds an electric
freedom, contributing to our economy without bike loan scheme which allows those working,
negatively affecting air quality. Cycle docking living and studying in the West of England the
stations are likely to become commonplace at opportunity to try out electric bikes on a ‘try before
our busiest transport interchanges and will help you buy’ basis. We support the Go Ultra Low West
to facilitate sustainable travel for door-to-door Programme, funded by Central Government’s Office
journeys. for Low Emission Vehicles (OLEV), to introduce an
We will continue partnership working with third- electric bike share scheme into Bath to increase
party providers of cycle hire schemes to ensure e-bike usage among residents. In addition to the
a smooth operation that benefits residents and provision of the bikes, charging points and other
visitors. supporting infrastructure needs to be provided.

89
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

Case Study: REPLICATE
Case Study: North Somerset Council
electric bikes for businesses. The REPLICATE project (Renaissance in
Places with Innovative Citizenship And
Since 2017 North Somerset Council has had
Technology) is a European research and
as fleet of electric bikes that are available to
development project that aims to deploy
loan out for free to businesses. To date the
integrated energy, mobility and ICT solutions
popular e-bikes have covered in excess of
in city districts. In Bristol, the Ashley,
2310 miles and at the end of the loan period,
Easton and Lawrence Hill Neighbourhood
1 in 4 businesses have gone on to buy their
Partnership area was chosen as the target
own e-bike.
district. Among other things, the Bristol
Alongside cutting carbon emissions, pilot explores how smart technology could
participating businesses have reported be used to enable greater sustainable
reduced spending on mileage claims and mobility to increase health and wellbeing
business travel, as well as health benefits for as well as enable better access to training
their staff. and employment, and engage citizens in
their energy use and travel patterns to
Many staff have also been inspired to change behaviour. Some of the interventions
purchase personal e-bikes for commuting. being piloted include e-bikes, electric
One of the staff who frequently used the car club vehicles, an on-demand electric
e-bike at one of the participating businesses, transport service, electric vehicle charging
said: “Since I’ve had the opportunity to use infrastructure, and personalised mobility
the e-bike I’ve decided to sell my car and buy applications.
a bike instead.”
Partners: Bristol, Florence (Italy) and
San Sebastian (Spain). There are also a
Locations where this is required will be agreed number of other ‘follower’ cities that will
with employers and other service providers. look into replicating interventions in their
cities including Essen (Germany), Lausanne
We will investigate and implement future (Switzerland) and Nilufer (Turkey). In addition
initiatives to support further take up of electric to this, there are also a number of ‘observer’
bikes. cities such as Guangzhou (China) and Bogota
The REPLICATE project – looking at how smart (Columbia).
technology could be used to enable greater
sustainable mobility – is trialing a connected
network of electric bicycles and electric cars in
Bristol, following the introduction of a similar
scheme in Exeter. Exeter saw the first on-street,
city wide, public hire electric bike network in the
UK and the first with a common smartcard for
electric bikes and car club cars. Bristol is looking to
pilot similar opportunities through the REPLICATE
project.

90
March 2020

L2. Reduce the number and severity of Remedial engineering schemes will be targeted
casualties for all road users at improving the safety of vulnerable road users,
in both urban and rural areas. Where appropriate,
Support Support
sustainable and inclusive
sustainable economiceconomic
and inclusive growth (EG)
growth (EG) £ or graph of graph
£ or arrowsof arrows
increasing
increasing
partners from different vulnerable user groups,
This policy contributes towards the delivery such as groups supporting those with sight, hearing
Support
Enable equality
Enable and sustainable
improve
equality and and
improve inclusive
accessibility (EA) economic
accessibility (EA) growth (EG) equal sign or£ or
equal open
sign or door increasing
openarrows
doorof
graph
Address poorEnable
air
Address equality
quality
poor airand and
quality improve
takeand
action accessibility
takeagainst
action (EA)
climate
against change
climate(CC) thermometer/cloud
change (CC) equal sign or open door
thermometer/cloud
Address
Contribute to bettertopoor
Contribute health,
betterairhealth,
quality and
wellbeing, takeand
safety
wellbeing, action against
security
safety and climate
(H)
security (H)change heartthermometer/cloud
heart(CC)
Contribute
Create better
Createplaces to
better(BP) better
places (BP)health, wellbeing, safety and security (H)google pin/ heart
tree/sunshine
google pin/ tree/sunshine

of the following objectives and outcomes: or mobility impairments, will be involved during
Create better places (BP) google pin/ tree/sunshine

design to ensure specific needs are taken into
consideration.
2-5 1-4 1-4 We will take the specific needs of vulnerable road
users into consideration during design, by working
with partners from different user groups.

The main interventions that will support the
Deliver road safety education, skills and
delivery of the policy, are:
training to equip people with the knowledge
l Consider the needs of all road users in the and skills to travel in a safe and sustainable
design of transport and highway schemes, way
particularly vulnerable road users
Road safety continues to remain a statutory
l Deliver road safety education and skills training responsibility of local authorities, and each
to equip people with the knowledge and skills to authority has their own road safety strategy. A
travel in a safe and sustainable way key way of improving safety is by delivering a
programme of education, training and publicity.
l Work in partnership to build safer communities
A proactive approach to road safety education and
Consider the needs of all road users in the training will continue to be adopted, based on best
design of transport and highway schemes, practice and national guidelines. This will continue
particularly vulnerable road users to be delivered in priority neighbourhoods, schools
and to vulnerable road users. Work on road safety
The needs of all road users are considered initiatives to reduce personal injury collisions by
in scheme design, and this will continue to promoting campaigns which focus on pedestrian
be a priority. There is a focus on the needs of and cycle safety, child car seat safety, young
pedestrians, cyclists, equestrians and motorcyclists, drivers, motorcycle training and older road users,
as well as children and older people, who are most will also continue. Casualty data will be assessed,
likely to be killed or seriously injured in collisions. and a focus will be put on areas where there is an
Road safety is considered at all stages of the design identified need or target group where skills can be
process for transport and highway schemes, from improved.
concept to construction.
We will review the programme of road safety
We will carry out road safety audits of schemes in education delivery, updating our approach with
accordance with the most up to date policies, and emerging best practice and seeking alternative
design schemes in a way that take account of local ways to fund this critical skill provision.
and national policies and best practice.

91
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

Case study: Bikeability Case study: Safe Systems
Bikeability is the ‘cycling proficiency’ test Road Safety Plan, Bristol
for the 21st century, designed to give the In 2015, Bristol City Council published its
next generation the skills and confidence to Safe Systems Road Safety Plan. The plan
ride their bikes on today’s roads. Training is demonstrated that poorer communities are
organised through schools and available to at disproportionate risk of injury on roads,
other residents through subsidised sessions with children being up to six times more
provided by local authorities or other likely than children from the wealthiest
providers. communities to be impacted. Efforts were
focused on reducing injuries within poorer
Bikeability offers three levels: Level 1 is in a
communities, including lower traffic speeds
protected environment, Level 2 on street with
and targeted traffic-law enforcement.
Level 3 exposing cyclists to more challenging
roads and traffic situations. Working with the Police, other services and
communities is important in delivering multi-
Since 2011, the West of England authorities
faceted interventions to reduce both the risk
have delivered in excess of 55,000 adult and
of road traffic injury and the fear of injury.
children Bikeability training sessions.
Educational work to support safe routes to
schools is being enhanced. On-going work
Work in partnership to build safer communities to improve air quality in the city will include
information to the public e.g. about in-car air
Political commitment, public support, cooperation quality and other health issues.
across partners and coordination are essential
ingredients in building safer communities. The term
‘Safe System’ represents the current best practice The knowledge and experience of Avon and
strategic thinking in road safety. This approach to Somerset Police, Avon Fire and Rescue and
road traffic injury prevention means addressing the other partners will continue to be used to deliver
unsafe behaviours of drink-driving, distraction (e.g. speed management systems to support casualty
texting), and speeding, which have become part of reduction and improve quality of life where there is
the culture for many, and contribute towards deaths evidence of speeding. Measures include:
and injuries, as well as fear among pedestrians and l Interactive speed reminder signs
cycle users. These behaviours can reduce the use
of active modes of travel, transferring them to car l Community speed watch
use e.g. for the school journey.
l Mobile speed enforcement
As technology continues to evolve, work will be
required with developers to ensure advances, such
as driverless vehicles, are not permitted on our
roads without appropriate safety measures being
taken. We also support the use of black boxes and
cameras on vehicles, in appropriate circumstances,
to maximise safety.

92
March 2020

We will continue to work in partnership with Avon
and Somerset Police, Avon Fire and Rescue and
other partners, including those developing new Case study: Highways vehicle fleet –
technology, to build safer communities. road safety systems analysis
Fleet cars and vehicles used by car clubs can have North Somerset Council’s highway vehicle
an occupational road risk around them. Support fleet, consisting of approximately 50% petrol/
will be given to disseminate best practice and diesel vehicles and 50% electric vehicles,
minimise and manage risks associated with this are all fitted with equipment to improve the
type of car use, by working in partnership with safety of officers driving the vehicles and
providers. other users of the highway.
We will work with fleet car and car club providers, Each vehicle is connected to a braking and
to identify and implement processes that acceleration monitoring system, which can
maximise the safety of users. be viewed retrospectively in the vehicle
booking management system. When braking
or acceleration is deemed to be close to or
outside of set safety parameters, then the
vehicle driver will be alerted and be urged
to amend their driving behaviours to fall
within the parameters, or otherwise receive
mandatory re-training to improve their safety
ratings.
Forward-facing dashboard cameras are
also fitted in each vehicle, recording every
movement on the highway in view. Footage
from these cameras are used when an
incident or close shave occurs on the
highway, with driver performance (or that of
other vehicles and highway users) analysed
to improve behaviours to avoid future similar
occurrences.
This post-driving trip analysis allows users to
drive the highway vehicles in the safest way
possible, to improve road safety on the North
Somerset highway.

93
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

L3. Encourage residents and employees developers of new homes, enabling us to influence
to make more sustainable and healthier the quality and consistency of engagement with
travel choices residents as they move home.
Personalised Travel Planning (PTP) provides
Support sustainable and inclusive
Support

This policy contributes towards the delivery
equality and
improve
Enable
Enable equality and
Address poor airAddress
quality and
Enable
poortake
air
Address
and Support
inclusive
sustainable
economic
Support
sustainable
equality
improve
accessibility (EA)
actionpoor
quality and
growthand
Enable
economic
sustainable
(EG)

action
climate
inclusive
accessibility
and
take
air
Address
against
equality
improve
quality
growth
Support
Enable
poorand
(EA)
air
and
against
change
take
Address
economic
and
improve
(EG)
inclusive
sustainable
accessibilityequal
(EA)
equality and
take
andair
climate
action
(CC)
quality
poor
graph
£ orgrowth
accessibility
action
change
against
and
sign
improve
quality
of
economic arrows
growth
open
or(EA)
thermometer/cloud
(CC)
and
(EG)
door
change
against
climate
£
inclusiveor
equal
take
graph
increasing
(EG)
economic
accessibility
climate
(CC)
action
of £
sign or
graph of
arrows
of£ or
increasing
or graph
arrows
growth
(EA)
(EG)
sign orequal
equaldoor
open
thermometer/cloud
thermometer/cloud
change
against (CC)
climate
opensign
change (CC)
arrows
increasing
£ or
dooror open
thermometer/cloud
increasing
graph of
equaldoor
arrows increasing
sign or open door
thermometer/cloud
people with the information, advice and motivation
they need to walk, cycle and use public transport
Contribute to better
Contribute
health,to better
wellbeing,
Contribute
health,
safety
to better
Contribute
wellbeing,
and security
health,
tosafety
betterand
health,
wellbeing,
(H)
Contribute to heart
security
safety
wellbeing,
(H)
better and security
safety
health, heart
and
(H) security
wellbeing, safety(H) heart
heartsecurity (H)
and heart

of the following objectives and outcomes:
Create better places
Create(BP)
better places
Create(BP)
betterCreate
placesbetter
(BP) places
Create (BP) google(BP)
better places pin/ tree/sunshine
google pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ tree/sunshine

more often. It can break down the perceived
barriers to using sustainable transport and
provide attractive and reliable information on the
1-3 4,5 1-3 1 2-4 alternatives.
We will target travel planning engagement with
The main interventions that will support the citizens who are at a transition point in their life
delivery of the policy, are: and who are making new journeys before travel
habits have been established.
l Support travel planning with developers,
education providers and individuals We will continue to provide PTP at events and on
the doorstep, as part of a package of measures
l Support travel planning with businesses and to support and encourage active travel and mode
employment sites shift.
l Encourage mode shift through grants, incentives
and rewards
l Maximise awareness of sustainable and active
travel choices and the benefits these bring
Case Study: Travel information
Support travel planning with developers, guides and personalised travel
education providers and individuals planning services
We know that encouraging the use of walking Through a combination of the Access West
and cycling at ‘transition points’, when people are programme and Section 106 funding from
making a change in their lives such as moving developers, South Gloucestershire have been
house, is likely to have a more lasting impact than developing site specific travel information
proposing a change when routines are established. packs for residents when moving into a
Walking and cycling infrastructure is required new development. The packs include travel
when new facilities are opened, and needs to be information guides showing the sustainable
supported with information to promote and inform transport options available in the local area,
potential users of door-to-door travel options from offers of support to try new ways of traveling
when they arrive. such as loan bikes and/or bus tickets, as well
as a range of travel leaflets and incentives.
With the level of growth planned in the West of
England, engaging with residents when they move The packs are assembled on the doorstep as
home will be a real opportunity to have an impact a personalised travel planning service, so are
on future travel behaviour. We are increasingly tailored to residents’ specific needs.
delivering residential travel planning on behalf of

94
March 2020

Travel plans will continue to be secured for new We will continue our active engagement with
developments through the development control pupils and staff to promote road safety and active
process, and we are developing guidance to travel.
improve the quality of Travel Plans submitted.
Travel plan S106 contributions are a regular We will continue to engage with primary and
feature of a very high proportion of approved secondary schools to deliver a combination of
development sites. skills training (including pedestrian training
and Bikeability), incentives and route planning
We will enforce required contributions and explore sessions.
the possibility of new supplementary planning
documents (SPD) to secure the necessary
resources.
We will continue to agree S106 funding from Case Study: Modeshift Stars
developers towards effective and lasting travel
All West of England Authorities support
planning and developing supplementary planning
school travel planning by encouraging
documents, if required, to ensure appropriate
schools to adopt the Modeshift Stars scheme.
funds are received.
This is an award scheme established to
We will support developers in the production, recognise schools that have demonstrated
delivery and monitoring of travel plans, if excellence in supporting active and
required, and secure the contribution of further sustainable travel. It allows schools to
funds for transport improvements if mode share identify travel and transport issues and helps
targets are not met. them to respond to them. It provides the
necessary categories to create a national
We are continuing our work with schools to standard travel plan, which is accessible
encourage children living within walking and online.
cycling distance to choose these modes of travel to
school. In particular, we target young people at the The following numbers of primary school
transition point between primary and secondary children and staff in North Somerset have
school, providing them with the skills to use active been involved in the following Modeshift
modes to travel to their new school. By working Stars initiatives between 2012 and 2017:
with schools to develop travel plans for staff and Air Quality (1,430); Cycling (601); Public
children, the safe use of active modes will be Transportation (1,604); Road Safety &
encouraged. Instilling these behaviours at a young Training (4,845); Walking (7,003).
age means they are more likely to remain into
In 2019 Bathampton Primary School became
adult life.
the first school within Bath and North East
Education and training for school aged children Somerset to be presented with a gold award
will make active travel safer and teach the benefits for reducing car journeys.
of walking, cycling and scooting. We are currently
Engagement by schools with the Modeshift
supporting schools in communicating the impact of
STARS scheme has continued to grow
poor air quality, by monitoring NO2 at 50 schools in
throughout 2018, 2019 and 2020.
Bristol.

95
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

Case Study: Travel to Work Survey Case Study: School Travel –
Since 2011 South Gloucestershire has Access Fund
undertaken an annual survey of commuting The Access Fund is being used to work with
patterns, with Bristol City Council joining in schools from March 2017 until March 2020 to
2014, and B&NES and North Somerset from increase rates of active travel, focussing on
2016. All organisations with more than 30 increasing pupil walking rates by 10%.
staff are invited to participate, and receive a
detailed report showing their unique travel Bristol City Council have identified schools
patterns to support continued engagement and recruited ‘Active Travel Champion’ staff
and influence staff travel. members in each one. The team have worked
intensively with schools to implement the
On a sub-regional level, this data has shown ‘WOW Walk to School Challenge’, involving
a downward trend for commuting by single pupils tracking their travel daily on an app,
car occupancy, with accompanying increases and earning badges for travelling actively
in all sustainable modes of travel, including each month. The team have also run a
walk, cycle, bus and train. This data forms range of engagement activities, ranging
part of an independent evaluation of the from educational classroom sessions and
many measures undertaken to support assemblies, to scooter training, ‘Car Free
sustainable transport in the West of England. Days’ and ‘Park and Stride Events’.
Together with a comments report, this is
used by the authorities to identify key areas During Year 1 of the Access Project, 57
of improvement in their transport systems. Schools were engaged and 373 engagement
activities were delivered. Engagement
Participation in the survey has increased year is resulting in an increase in active
on year up to 2017, when more than 21,000 travel trips to school, including walking,
people took part. scooting and park & stride. The aim is to
continue recruiting new schools, alongside
engagement with existing schools, to ensure
Support travel planning with businesses and active travel is embedded in each schools’
employment sites ethos, and walking, scooting & cycling rates
continue to rise.
We recognise sustainable economic growth
relies on an efficient and reliable sustainable
transport network. Business needs can vary
We are actively engaging with over 600 businesses
greatly, depending on type of work and location.
to deliver a range of initiatives that encourage
Working in partnership with businesses, and
sustainable commuting. We are providing advice
ideally having a single point of contact in an
to support the uptake of more active modes of
organization in the form of a ‘travel champion’
travel and promoting the benefits of this, including
enables an understanding to be gained of needs
the resulting reduction in absenteeism through a
and site-specific issues. Measures, interventions
healthier workforce and improved staff retention.
and ongoing support can then be tailored to their
This can help solve car parking issues, for those
motivations, supporting their sustainable economic
who have no alternative but to travel by car.
growth.

96
March 2020

Evidence suggests that when employers have a
travel plan in place, single occupancy car trips
could be reduced by between 4% and 18%. This Case study: North Bristol SusCom
range is dependent on the intensity of measures to
encourage the use of sustainable transport modes, North Bristol SusCom is a group of leading
as well as external ‘push factors’, such as localised employers working together to reduce
congestion. congestion and support the development
of a fully integrated, sustainable transport
We actively promote a flexible working culture. This network for North Bristol. They know that
includes encouraging employers to offer greater combatting traffic congestion, and increasing
flexibility in working hours, allowing employees to the viability of walking, cycling and public
travel into the office out of peak times, resulting in transport, is vital for the long-term prosperity
less of a ‘peak’ on the transport network. We also of our businesses and the health and well-
encourage reducing the need to travel, by allowing being of our staff.
employees to work from home.
SUSCOM lead by example, taking a co-
Work will continue with both existing businesses ordinated approach to managing traffic
and those that are moving into the area or to new impact and supporting 40,000+ staff and
development sites to gain a full understanding of 30,000 students to reduce the number of
their transport needs. This requires an appreciation short car journeys made. North Bristol
of both employee travel needs, as well as those SusCom encourages car sharing, walking,
required for operating the business e.g. deliveries. cycling, bus and rail as preferred ways
For new employment development sites, we to travel to work and around the area on
recognise the need to offer a range of travel business. They also support home working,
options to enable more people to use sustainable and if journeys need to be undertaken by
modes of travel. car, electric vehicles and car sharing are
promoted.
We will work with those developing economic and
land use policies, to provide a joined-up approach
between economic and transport planners. Encourage mode shift through grants,
We will continue to tailor our engagement with incentives and rewards
businesses according to their motivations and Match-funded employer grants, which originally
site-specific issues, in addition to promoting started under the Local Sustainable Transport
flexible working hours and reducing the need to Fund, will continue to be offered via the Access
travel, by home working. WEST Fund. Employers can apply for a match
We will encourage areas to build upon the funded grant to implement infrastructure on their
example set by North Bristol SusCom, developing site to facilitate and promote sustainable modes.
best practice, sharing ideas and giving businesses Examples include cycle storage facilities, Real Time
a voice. Information screens within their premises and the
marking and signing of bespoke car-share spaces
We will continue to take part in sustainable travel within their premises.
forums for businesses and organisations, giving
them a voice to influence and shape transport It is important to incentivise and reward individuals
policy and investment within the region. to reinforce positive travel choices. The annual
travel challenge will continue and there is an aim

97
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

to increase the number of participants who are
motivated and encouraged to change their travel
behaviour for a given period for a potential reward.
Case Study: GKN match funded grant
The success of businesses who have implemented
sustainable transport initiatives will be celebrated, Based in Filton, employer GKN employs
by hosting sustainable travel awards, where 2500 people. With match funding grant from
accreditations for travel plans will also be Access WEST GKN installed 3 heavy duty
presented. bicycle maintenance stands with tools and
an E-Bike charging locker. The maintenance
We will continue to offer grants, incentives, stands are so well used that a further 3
rewards and awards to businesses and are due to be installed in the coming year.
individuals, to encourage the use of non-car GKN are looking to revise the Bike to Work
modes of travel, building and refreshing schemes scheme to increase the limit from £1,000 to
based on best practice. enable employees to invest in E-Bikes.

Maximise awareness of sustainable and active
and refresh trip planners and other digital tools
travel choices and the benefits these bring to keep abreast of advances, not just reacting to
The most fundamental issue in behaviour change them.
is increasing people’s motivation to change their
A major media/information campaign will be
existing thinking or habits. Traditional policies
undertaken using local radio and social media, to
that are proven to be most effective at reducing
inform the public about their travel choices and the
congestion such as demand management tools are
impact of these choices. Advice will be sought from
often expensive and unpopular even though they
our partners on how bad news messages, such as
will generate revenue to reinvest in alternatives.
the harm caused to the environment by driving,
An alternative is to put in place measures that can be delivered in a way to grab people’s attention
encourage individuals towards making more and encourage them to consider more sustainable
environmentally beneficial decisions around travel modes.
how they choose to travel. Such interventions
This social marketing will increase awareness
can provide credible and cheaper alternatives to
about the role everyone must play in making the
traditional price or supply side interventions. In
West of England a better place to live, work and
particular, carefully considering what and how the
visit.
various transport options are made available and
how information and incentives are presented to
individuals can help ensure that the more healthy
and sustainable transport options become the
preferred options.
Additional engagement needs to include a
comprehensive range of high-level promotion,
self-select information and services, personalised
services and advice, social marketing and
opportunities to participate to maximise delivery of
effective change. We need to continue to develop

98
March 2020

We will seek advice from our partners, including We will use events, including those run by other
Living Streets, Sustrans and the NHS, to sectors, to maximise awareness of active travel
understand the key drivers for successful media and associated benefits.
campaigns.
The travelwest website (www.travelwest.info) is
It is important to consider patient’s the one stop shop for all travel information, which
access to healthcare through a range prioritises walking, cycling and public transport
of transport options. We are aware options in the search results. This will continue to
that the provision of hospital services be promoted as a journey planner, alongside the
is changing with an increase in people Better by Bike website, as the dedicated portal
travelling from a wider catchment to for cycling information, providing practical advice,
hospitals in Bristol and outside the downloadable maps and information about routes
West of England. and events.
We will work in partnership with the Clinical The travelwest website and journey planner
Commissioning Groups in the West of England will continue to be developed, maintained and
to help plan transport to best enable people to promoted to support sustainable travel choices.
access healthcare services sustainably wherever
possible.
We will use social marketing to maximise the
reach of information campaigns to influence travel
choice, building on best practice and experience
from other sectors.
Information and events will continue to be provided
for West of England residents, ensuring active
modes of travel are at the forefront of their minds
when choosing how to travel. Area wide events,
such as Bath Cyclefest, which was shortlisted for
a Modeshift award for a Community Sustainable
Travel Initiative in 2017, will be used to motivate
and engage with communities. Work with other
service providers and organisations who engage
with communities will continue, enabling us
to ‘piggy back’ on their events, such as health
campaigns. This provides an opportunity to gain
opinions and insights from people who would not
normally attend a transport event.

99
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

L4. Support opportunities for all sectors of Limited opportunities, combined with a lack of
the population to access the services they affordable housing, is contributing to some young
require, wherever they live people moving away from rural communities.
The cost and low availability of public transport
Support sustainable
Support Support
and
sustainablesustainable
inclusive
and economic
and
inclusive growth
inclusive
economic (EG)
economic
growth growth
(EG) (EG)£ or graph of £
(EG)£ or graph of £
of
increasing
graph
orarrows
arrows arrows
increasing increasing in rural areas is a significant challenge for young
This policy contributes towards the delivery
Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth or graph of arrows increasing
EnableEnable
equality Enableand
and
equalityimprove
equality
improveand improve
accessibility accessibility
(EA)
accessibility (EA) (EA) (EA) equal sign or or
signdoor
door
equal
open
equalorsign open
equal open
sign door door
or open
Enable equality and improve accessibility

people and can act as a barrier to their progress
Address poor air
Address Address
quality
poor air poortake
and
quality air quality
action
and air and
takequality
actiontake
against actionaction
climate
against against
change
climate (CC)
climate
change thermometer/cloud
change
(CC) (CC) thermometer/cloud
thermometer/cloud
Address poor and take against climate change (CC) thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better
ContributeContribute
to health,
better to
wellbeing,
better
health, health,
safety
wellbeing, wellbeing,
and security
safety andsafety
(H)and(H)and
security securityheart
(H)heart heartheart
Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety security (H)
googlegoogle
pin/ pin/
tree/sunshine
google pin/ pin/
tree/sunshine

of the following objectives and outcomes:
CreateCreate
betterbetter
places
Create(BP)
better
places
Create (BP)places
better (BP) (BP)
places tree/sunshine
google tree/sunshine

into employment. For many of these young people,
having a driving licence and being able to afford a
car is essential, but may be considered as ‘forced
3 2-5 2,3 1,4 car-ownership’ given the lack of choice. Insurance
costs can be prohibitive, and there is a real risk
that other basic household budgets are cut to own
and run a motor vehicle.
The main interventions that will support the
delivery of the policy, are: The consequences are reflected in the social and
economic structure of rural areas, with some job-
l Support those without a private car, who need to seeking younger people needing to move away,
travel, in accessing the services they require and local jobs largely being taken by people with
l Promote the role of technology in accessing access to private transport. In the long-term, this
services and employment can impact on the demographic structure of rural
communities.
l Support the role of taxis and private hire
vehicles It is not only young and older people who struggle
with poor connectivity in rural areas. A lack
l Support the role of demand responsive and of safe footways, cycle provision and crossing
community transport points connecting people and local services act
as a barrier not only to safety and active travel,
Support those without a private car, who but also to mental health and productivity. As a
need to travel, in accessing the services they result, people in rural areas often have little choice
require but to use their private cars. This has financial
implications for those who would prefer not to
Poor accessibility is most commonly associated drive and environmental implications for air quality
with more rural areas, which are sparsely and carbon emissions.
populated and have limited services. However,
ensuring access to goods, services and information Transport can be a significant factor in the
in urban areas is equally important. Congestion, exclusion and isolation of many low-income
combined with an already well used public families and act as a barrier to the take up of
transport network and rising costs of transport employment, education and lead to missed
services, can impact on opportunities available to health appointments. For some households the
populations in towns and cities across the West of costs associated with owning and running a car
England. are prohibitively high, making them dependent
on public transport for longer journeys. Lower
Young people in rural areas can have difficulties population densities in rural areas mean that bus
accessing further education, training, employment, routes tend to be longer, serving fewer potential
evening entertainment, advice and other services. passengers along the route, leading to higher
As a result, they can find themselves isolated.

100
March 2020

operating costs and lower revenues. This can often
result in rural areas having a limited and heavily
subsidised public transport service. Case study: Wheels to Work
Other groups that often report becoming isolated in the West of England
include parents without a car, people out of The Wheels to Work West project, part of the
work, the long term ill, carers and people with DfT funded Access WEST programme, spans
disabilities and non-visible disabilities and the West of England. The project provides
conditions, including mental health issues. There support for those in need to travel to job and
is a growing elderly rural population who find training course interviews, new roles, job
themselves isolated and having to rely on family placements and voluntary positions, with the
and neighbours to help them. Improvements in aim of promoting greater access to work and
accessibility are required to help older people skills.
maintain their access needs and reduce the need to
drive in old age. The scheme encourages cycling through
the provision of loan bikes and discounted
We will work with our partner organisations to bike sales, and public transport through the
assess whether people are able to reach key provision of First Bus m-tickets (day, week
services and activities safely, reliably, affordably and month tickets) and paper Avon Rider
and with relative ease by public transport and tickets – which can be used for a variety
produce an action plan to identify how to improve of different bus operators. In addition,
any existing gaps in provision, to enhance participants can access a range of other
accessibility. offers including adult cycle training and
dedicated travel advice to help them plan
To retain accessibility to key services in less their journey to a place of work, volunteering
populated areas, we will work with service or training.
providers and other partners, including the
voluntary sector, to investigate options that The four authorities work closely with a
change the way services are delivered, such as range of partner organisations across the
providing multi-service hubs, and other innovative public, private and third sector to deliver
and cost-effective measures. the Wheels to Work West project including:
Department for Work and Pensions Job
Centre Plus, SGS College, Weston College,
Southern Brooks, Alliance Homes, Sovereign
Housing, Creative Youth Network, Curo,
Julian House, LifeCycle UK amongst others,
with new partners added on a regular basis.
The overall target for the Wheels to Work
West project is to provide benefit to 5000
people seeking work, skills or training across
the West of England region by the end of
March 2020.

101
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

Case study: Total Transport
North Somerset Council was awarded funding transport (public transport, home-to-school
from the Department for Transport for a Total transport, community transport and non-
Transport project to run between April 2015 and emergency patient transport) in the Chew
April 2017. The aim was to review passenger Valley area could be better integrated to get
transport provision and develop a proposal for a more coordinated and efficient network and
implementing service integration. Numerous better connect people with the facilities they
proposals were identified, including: using rail need. Recommendations were made on how
to transport students from Yatton to Backwell existing passenger transport provision could
School, combining community meals with home be improved, but implementation would have
to school taxi routes, and integrating home to imposed an unacceptable cost burden.
school transport with local bus services.
South Gloucestershire Council used the
To deliver these changes, a new Integrated Total Transport Fund to help understand
Transport Unit (ITU) was created in January the challenges and issues facing access to
2017, bringing together staff delivering public health services particularly from rural areas.
transport, community transport, home to school The baseline data identified there was some
transport and fleet management, directed by the duplication of transport provided by community
Transport Commissioning Board. This provides transport and the potential to make more of
a strategic overview of transport commissioning ‘spare’ capacity (empty seats). A feasibility study
across the council. Medium-term financial plan was undertaken to explore options to improve
savings of £600,000 were initially identified over the efficiency of community transport and make
three years. So far, £60,000 of savings were greater use of spare capacity. The proposal
delivered in 2017/18, and £291,000 savings have was to provide a shared software membership/
been declared for 2018/19. booking system, dedicated shared webpage and
possibly a dedicated helpline. Unfortunately,
B&NES Council was also awarded Total no follow-on funding was available, so the
Transport Fund funding in 2015. B&NES used proposals have not been taken any further.
the funding to consider how passenger

Promote the role of technology in accessing a profound impact on the way in which we now
services and employment choose to consume our goods and services.

Access to the internet can be an alternative to Whilst broadband services are now available
making a journey. The past decade has seen across the West of England, there is widespread
considerable and widespread changes in the variation in the quality and speed of broadband
availability and use of the internet to access goods services, with generally lower speeds in rural
and services. The Broadband Delivery UK project areas. We recognise that improved broadband
has provided universal access to basic broadband, coverage will help facilitate greater home working
which has revolutionised quality of life and meant and relieve pressures on the transport network,
people can now access almost any goods and particularly by avoiding the need to make journeys
services without the need to travel. It has had during peak periods. Homeworking can also allow

102
March 2020

those who are unable to travel to work, to access We will work with taxi operators to review
employment without the need to travel. charging policies, ensuring taxis are fair,
competitive and accessible for all.
We will work with the Government and internet
service providers to encourage them to increase We will work to ensure the provision of adequate
existing levels of investment in broadband, 4G, centralised taxi waiting and drop off facilities
5G, and any other emerging internet access in city and town centres, and work with taxi
technologies, in all areas of the West of England. operators to ensure that services are available to
all as an alternative to the private car.
We recognise that although access to the internet
is now readily available in most areas, some The emergence of on-demand taxi services, such
sectors of the population do not have the skills to as Uber, illustrates how traditional taxi provision
be able to benefit or consume services in this way. may be unappealing to some segments of the
Training is needed for those who own, but are not population, as more demand responsive transport
confident using, computers and smart phones. becomes increasingly popular. Mobile phone and
web communications are enabling individuals to
Training and internet accessibility is key for link with cars for specific journeys, providing a
understanding information about journey options, reliable and affordable alternative to traditional taxi
such as distance, cost, time, energy used; or bus use.
checking timetables; accessing journey apps; and
for purchasing slightly cheaper bus tickets and Shared taxis can bolster existing public transport
other tickets conveniently. The wider benefits this provision during busy periods such as the morning
will bring to the West of England should not be and evening peak hours, filling gaps in the public
underestimated. transport network by serving remote locations that
are currently not served by public transport. By
We will work with skills providers to ensure encouraging the use of electric vehicles as part of
training is available for those who would like to taxi fleets, taxis can not only contribute to removing
access services on the internet, so they can gain traffic from our roads and reducing congestion, but
the skills and confidence to do so. also improve air quality.

Support the role of taxis and private hire We will continue to support the introduction of
vehicles shared use taxi schemes that support the local
bus network and provide flexible attractive
Taxis and private hire vehicles have a role to play alternatives to those who would otherwise drive.
in providing accessibility to different sectors of
the population. They can be cheaper than car On-demand services, which may be through a
ownership and play a role as part of a longer- shared, cross-region, multi-operator system or
journey using public transport, for example by application, could assist local operators in keeping
providing links to and from rail stations, as well as up with technological advancements and continue
some complex home-to-school transport journeys. to remain competitive, enabling local economic
Taxis and private hire vehicles provide a necessary growth. A shared system could involve journey
service to those who are physically unable to options from existing on-demand services such as
access public transport and require a door-to-door Uber, to provide a fair and competitive, accessible
service. system across the West of England. This would
enable users to choose the fastest and cheapest
taxi services for their desired journeys.

103
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

We will continue to work with local taxi operators is also a role for such services in providing the
to encourage them to look at adopting on-demand first and last mile journeys for tourists who are
services through smartphone technology. visiting the fantastic cultural offer of our historic
market and seaside towns and villages, as well
Support the role of demand responsive and as the stunning natural environment in the West
community transport of England. Dwindling commercially operated bus
services are leaving a lack of access between the
Community transport encompasses a range major public transport corridors and the villages,
of transport services - such as dial-a-rides, towns and rural areas situated away from these
community-owned buses, group minibus hire main transport services.
schemes and voluntary car scheme – that
supplement commercial public transport services. Another well-established form of demand-
Most community transport is demand-responsive responsive transport is a shared taxi scheme,
and offers door-to-door transport for members of under which travel in specific areas can be
the schemes. It relies heavily on volunteers and coordinated and tailored more to specific needs
is predominantly focussed on local communities. than is possible with a fixed bus route. The growth
Most schemes were set up as local initiatives to in app-based taxi booking creates tremendous
meet local transport needs. opportunities for expanding the role of shared taxi
services in urban and rural areas - although trials
There is no statutory duty on local authorities so far have not generated the volume necessary
to support community transport, but it is widely for a sustainable commercial operation.
recognised that the sector plays a vital role in
helping people to live independently and play We will continue to support and encourage
an active part in community life – particularly community and demand responsive transport
those who find it difficult to access mainstream schemes, working with providers and the
public transport. Local authorities provide voluntary sector to improve information and
guidance, assistance and funding to schemes, but facilities, and to coordinate service provision.
administration and service delivery are carried Subject to funding, we will support new initiatives
out by the schemes themselves. Local and central that make use of emerging technologies to
Government make grants available occasionally for develop community and demand-responsive
new vehicles – subject to State Aid rules. transport.

In addition, community-owned buses can operate
scheduled bus services within the scope of
regulations that protect commercial operations.
Community transport operations in rural areas
are faced with the same dilemma that rural bus
operators face, i.e. the sparsity of population and
dispersed nature of settlements give rise to higher
operating costs and lower revenue than urban
operations.
Community transport will play an increasingly
important role in filling a gap for commuters, as
well as for social/mobility needs. However, there

104
March 2020

L5. Support the identification and
implementation of measures that will
Case Study: Felton and Winford improve air quality
Community Bus
In 2015, the villages of Felton and Winford Support sustainable
Support

This policy contributes towards the delivery
Enable
Enable equality and
and inclusive
improve
Address poor airAddress
sustainable
equality and
quality and
economic
Support
Enable
poortake
air
and inclusive
sustainable
improve(EA)
equality
accessibility
actionpoor
quality
Address and
Support
growthand(EG)
sustainable
economic
inclusive
accessibility
Enable
Address
air
against
and
take
improve
equality
quality
climate
action
Support
Enable
poorand
air
and
(EA)
against
change
take
Address
and
growth
accessibility
improve
quality
(CC)
action
climate
poor
£ orgrowth
(EG)
economic
inclusive
sustainable
equal
andair
(EA)
accessibility
equality and
take
graph
economic
and
sign
improve
thermometer/cloud
action
change
against
quality
of
open
or(EA)
(CC)
£
inclusive

andagainst
climate
or
arrows
(EG)growth
equal
change
take
graph
increasing
door
(EG)
economic
accessibility
(CC)
climate
equaldoor
thermometer/cloud
change
against
increasing
or graph
arrows
of £
sign or
(EA)
thermometer/cloud
action
growth
open
(EG)
sign orequal
(CC)
climate
of£ or
arrows
graph of
opensign
dooror open
thermometer/cloud
change (CC)
increasing
arrows
£ or increasing
graph of
equaldoor
arrows increasing
sign or open door
thermometer/cloud

were left without public transport when the
Contribute to better
Contribute
health,to better
wellbeing,
Contribute
health,
safety
to better
Contribute
wellbeing,
and security
health,
tosafety
betterand
health,
wellbeing,
(H)
Contribute to heart
security
safety
wellbeing,
(H)
better and security
safety
health, heart
and
(H) security
wellbeing, safety(H) heart
heartsecurity (H)
and heart

of the following objectives and outcomes:
Create better places
Create(BP)
better places
Create(BP)
betterCreate
placesbetter
(BP) places
Create (BP) google(BP)
better places pin/ tree/sunshine
google pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ tree/sunshine

local bus operator withdrew services. With
declining revenue support budgets, contract
prices to operate a replacement service
were unaffordable. Low passenger numbers 6 5,6 1-5 1 1-4
and the rural nature of the area were not
attractive to commercial operators.
The main interventions that will support the
As an alternative, North Somerset Council delivery of the policy, are:
commissioned a community bus service,
working with the parish council and a local l Support ongoing work to manage the impact of
community transport operator. The service transport on air quality and climate change
operated with a minibus, which was sufficient
l Support ongoing work on Clear Air Zones and
to cater for the passenger numbers in the
the UK extensions Air Quality Plan
area and suitable for navigating rural roads.
Felton and Winford are close to Bristol l Support work on Zero and Low Emission
Airport, so the service operated to and from Vehicles
the airport only. This enabled passengers
to access the high-frequency Airport Flyer
Support ongoing work to manage the impact of
service into Bristol city centre, and other
transport on air quality and climate change
local bus services.
Poor air quality has significant impacts on human
The community bus began operation in
health, which risks holding back economic growth
August 2015 and, with a dedicated driver
due to the impacts of poor health on productivity.
and vehicle, quickly became part of the local
It is damaging the natural environment and
community. Local residents took ownership
negatively impacts on the prosperity, quality and
of the service, promoting it locally by word-
perceived quality of the region. There is increasing
of-mouth. The service operated for almost
public recognition that air pollution is associated
three years, until May 2018, when developer
with adverse health impacts throughout the human
funding from Bristol Airport saw the return
life cycle, contributing to heart disease, stroke,
of a local bus service to the area. At this
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and lung
point, the community bus and driver were
cancer. Particulates are known to have negative
redeployed to another community in need
health impacts, even at very low concentrations.
(Worlebury area in Weston-super-Mare).

105
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

Levels of nitrogen dioxide (NO2) have started to
fall in recent years. However, despite cleaner new
vehicles replacing older ones, the contribution from
Case study: Tour buses in Bath
road vehicles has fallen at a lower rate due to an
increased share of diesel vehicles. Although the Tour bus services in Bath carry up to 3,000
average emissions per vehicle is much higher for passengers per day at busy times. Prior to
heavy goods vehicles and buses, the high number 2005, Bath had four open top bus operators
of diesel passenger and light goods vehicles on the running tours in the city and there was a
road means that these are the biggest contributors demonstrable impact on the quality of life for
to overall pollution. residents and visitors alike. The low costs of
entry into the market and high rewards led to
Air pollution levels in parts of Bristol, B&NES a situation of over-supply. Following a Public
and South Gloucestershire continue to exceed Inquiry held by the Traffic Commissioner,
Government standards for NO2. Consequently, Traffic Regulation Conditions were introduced
central Bath, Keynsham, Saltford, central Bristol, which strictly regulated open top tour buses
Kingswood and Staple Hill have active Air Quality in Bath. These have been highly successful
Action Plans. Air Quality Management Areas have in reducing the detrimental impacts of the
also recently been declared at Temple Cloud and services. Long-term investment by Bath
Farrington Gurney on the A37. Bus Co, with assistance from the DfT and
supported by B&NES, has resulted in a fleet
We will support the preparation of Air Quality
of low emission vehicles being operated in
Action Plans and delivery of specific measures
Bath. This makes a positive impact on air
identified to improve air quality.
quality in the city, when compared to the
Tour buses, often open top, operate in Bristol and alternative of visitors seeing sites by car or
Bath. They operate as registered bus services coach.
to a fixed timetable and form part of the ‘visitor
experience’, making a positive contribution to the
local economy. However, these services need to be Support ongoing work on Clean Air Zones and
regulated to minimise any detrimental impacts such the UK Air Quality Plan
as exhaust pollution, noise pollution, road dangers, To improve air quality, the Government has
unnecessary traffic congestion and visual intrusion. requested councils across England – including
We will work with tour bus operators to develop an B&NES, Bristol City and South Gloucestershire
upgrade plan to operate ultra-low or zero emission – to achieve compliance with NO2 limits ‘in the
vehicles in city centres. shortest possible time’. This is part of the UK Air
Quality Plan. There are hotspots in Bath, Bristol
In addition to NO2 emissions, road transport is and South Gloucestershire where concentrations
one of the largest sources of carbon dioxide (CO2) of NO2 (caused by vehicle emissions) exceed the
emissions, which contributes to climate change. acceptable national and European limit of 40μg/m3.
Although progress has been made in reducing
overall emissions since the last Local Transport Although most of the schemes in the JLTP4 will
Plan was prepared, the share of emissions from have positive impacts on air quality, the local
transport has increased in the West of England. authorities are also responsible for developing
Further action is needed to meet the West of innovative Clean Air Plans that will achieve
England’s aim to be carbon neutral by 2030. statutory NO2 limit values in a way that best

106
March 2020

meets the needs of their communities and local l Bristol City Council and South Gloucestershire
businesses. This will include Clean Air Zones Council successfully bid for around £5m funding
(CAZ) which are defined geographic areas where from government. Through a partnership with
targeted action is taken to improve air quality, First Bus, this funding helped to unlock more
deliver health benefits, and support economic than £30 million investment, when match-
growth. Clean Air Zones may include both non- funding was taken into account. This enabled the
charging and charging measures. Businesses cases introduction of 110 new gas-powered buses into
are under development and will be submitted to the sub-regional fleet.
central Government to propose options to achieve
the required standards within the shortest possible
l Bristol City Council in partnership with First Bus
time. is in the process of trialing two hybrid electric
buses that automatically switch to electric mode
A decision on Clean Air Zone proposals will be taken when entering an Air Quality Management Area.
by each local authority and the Government’s Joint
Air Quality Unit, upon completion of business cases.
l Bristol City Council received Early Measures
funding from the Clean Air Fund for £1.1m to
We will support ongoing work in the development improve cycle accessibility in South Bristol and
of CAZs. support taxi operators to move to low emission
vehicles.
Measures currently underway to improve air quality
and climate change include:
l The Clean Vehicle Technology Fund provided
funding to retrofit 42 Euro V classification
buses with Thermal Management Technology
to improve their environmental performance,
whilst the Clean Bus Fund provided £0.5 million
funding to retrofit 35 of the sub-region’s most
polluting bus services with selective catalytic
reduction technology to improve their rating to
Euro V and Euro VI standard. In 2018, Bristol
City Council, South Gloucestershire and B&NES
were successful in a £2.2m bid to Government to
retrofit a further 81 Euro IV and Euro V buses, to
bring them to Euro VI standard.
Most recently, Bristol City Council and Bath and
North East Somerset Council secured £2.48
million from the DfT to help retrofit 166 buses
on routes into Bristol and Bath, reducing the
amount of nitrogen dioxide and other pollutants
by up to 94%.
l B&NES successfully received funding through
the Green Bus Fund in 2012 to replace the
existing Park & Ride buses in Bath with less
polluting hybrid buses.

107
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

Clean Air Zones
The Government defines a Clean Air Zone vehicles and taxis, as well as heavy goods
(CAZ) as an area where targeted action is vehicles, light goods vehicles and cars.
required to improve air quality. Resources are
prioritised and coordinated to shape the urban CAZs will be supported by complementary
environment in a way that delivers improved measures to encourage more active and
health benefits and supports economic growth. sustainable travel and accelerate improvements
in vehicle fleets. This could include better bus
In the designated CAZ area, measures to priority, bus stop facilities and live information,
reduce vehicle emissions and cut pollution more secure cycle parking, electric cycle hire,
may be introduced, with the aim of improving and new or improved cycling and walking
everybody’s health. CAZs may include charging routes.
and/or access restrictions on vehicles to limit
the most polluting vehicles using certain roads
at certain times. The most polluting vehicles
may include some buses, coaches, private hire A Clean Air Zone for Bath

Support work on zero and low emission The West of England has placed significant
vehicles investment in Ultra Low Emission Vehicles (ULEVs)
through the Local Sustainable Transport Fund
With continued improvements in vehicle emissions and Rapid Charging Points scheme, including the
standards and the replacement of older vehicles, ‘Source West’ project that promotes the introduction
air quality is likely to improve and CO2 emissions of electric vehicles into South West England. This
to decrease over the longer-term. The future provides information on electric vehicles, including
uptake of electric vehicles and other types of low an energy usage cost comparator and an app
emission vehicles will be critical in helping to providing a secure payment interface.
deliver reductions in harmful emissions, although it
is recognised they still contribute to congestion and The Government has launched its Road to Zero
poor air quality, due to brake and tyre dust. Strategy, with the ambition to see at least half
of new cars to be ULEVs by 2030. Despite recent
Zero emission vehicles are fully electric and wholly investment, there is a need for more funds
driven by an electric motor with no combustion to be dedicated to improving electric vehicle
engine, meaning they do not produce any exhaust infrastructure. Recent research identified that by
emissions. At present, most zero emission vehicles 2020 there will be more than 1 million electric
have a range of approximately 100-150 miles, vehicles on roads in the UK, creating demand for
however it is expected that this range, and the an additional 83,500 charging points. This is an
take up of these vehicles will increase as battery increase of 83%, from the current number of 16,500
technology improves. Low emission vehicles are charging points.
plug-in hybrids, which are powered both by an
electric motor for a limited range, followed by a
conventional engine that is used once the battery
has been depleted.

108
March 2020

l Maximise CO2 reductions from the transition
to ULEVs, by promoting ULEVs to run on
Case study: Electric vehicle funding renewable energy and to act as batteries for
and metrobus ULEV buses the electricity grid, helping to match energy
supply from renewables with energy demand
The Office for Low Emission Vehicles (OLEV)
awarded £7million of funding over 5 years to l Through changes to existing parking standards
promote the uptake of electric vehicles (EVs) include a requirement for new developments
across the region, following our Go Ultra Low to provide greater levels of electric vehicle
West bid. As a result, EV purchases in the charging infrastructure for residential,
region will rise to 5,000 new registrations per commercial and industrial developments
year by 2020.
The metrobus project will see over 50 new
ULEV buses brought into service within
the West of England. The gas-powered
Case study: Weston-super-Mare
vehicles will be modern, low emission and
Town Centre Regeneration Supplementary
expected to reduce carbon emissions and fuel
Planning Document (SPD)
consumption by 25 per cent, compared to a
standard bus. The SPD requires at least 10% of the total
parking spaces at new builds to include
superfast charging points with a minimum
of 1 space. In addition, to future-proof car
Together with sustained investment in active and
parking areas passive provision is to be
sustainable modes of travel, low emission vehicles
included to support the provision of charging
have a pivotal role to play in improving local air
points for 40% of spaces in the longer term.
quality and addressing climate change.
We will continue to progress work on low
emission vehicles in the short-term and:
l Identify and address any barriers to the uptake
of ULEVs, especially in those areas which have
been declared Air Quality Management Areas
or CAZs
l Introduce policy measures to encourage EV
uptake
l Through metrobus, continue to support the
introduction of low emission buses, through
Statutory Quality Partnership Schemes or other
measures, including Clean Air Zones
l Provide advice, support and training to other
private and public-sector organisations,
including businesses, to encourage the
introduction of ULEVs

109
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 8:
Local connectivity continued

Support will continue to be provided on work being
undertaken through the existing Ultra-Low West
programme, ensuring the region is at the forefront
of providing facilities for EV owners. Across the
West of England, the funding will be used to:
l Increase the number of charge points through a
regional charging network. This would include
public, business and car club charge points
l Deliver more EV-capable car club bays
l Convert at least 20-25% of the four West of
England councils’ light vehicle fleet to EV –
approx. 100 vehicles
l Build 4 rapid charging hubs at high-profile
locations across the region which would allow
EV owners to charge their car in 30 minutes or
less
l Expand the low-emission Freight Consolidation
scheme to reduce the number of heavy-goods
vehicles entering the city centre and link this
with micro-consolidation and ‘last mile delivery’
for small and medium-sized businesses
Work will also continue to:
l Give greater consideration of low emission
strategies within future planning documentation
and define specific policy measures to encourage
EV uptake, such as a West of England Electric
Vehicle SPD and through Local Plan policies
l Promote ULEV taxis through improvements
to infrastructure, grants and other take-up
incentives
l Formulate a strategy to overcome barriers to the
provision of ULEV infrastructure
We will support ongoing work, as appropriate,
in the development of zero and low emission
vehicles, including the necessary infrastructure
including a regional electric vehicle charging
network.

110
March 2020

Section 9:
Neighbourhood connectivity
Neighbourhood challenges N1. Use master planning and local design
to create better places
Vehicle speeds, the volume of traffic and the
pollution levels generated on main roads can often Support sustainable and inclusive
Support Support
sustainable and (EG) (EG)
inclusive
economic
and
growth
inclusive
sustainable
economic
growthand
Support
inclusive
sustainable
economic graph
£ orgrowth of
economic £ or
arrows
(EG)growth arrows
increasing
graph of
arrows
of£ or
increasing
or graph
arrows
of £
increasing
graph
(EG) increasing

feel excessive for residents and impact negatively This policy contributes towards the delivery
Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG) £ or graph of arrows increasing
Enable equality and
Enable
improve
equality and improve and improve
equality
accessibility
Enable
(EA)
equality
accessibility
Enable Enable improve
accessibility
and
(EA) equal
accessibility
(EA)
equality and sign
improve sign or
door
equal
open
or(EA)
accessibility equaldoor
dooror open
opensign
sign orequal
equaldoor
open
(EA) sign or open door
Address poor airAddress
quality and
poortake
air
Address
quality
actionpoor
against
andAddress
air
take
quality
climate
action against
take
change
poorand
air
Address action
climate
quality
(CC)
poor thermometer/cloud
andair
against
take
change
action
qualityclimate
(CC)
and thermometer/cloud
against
change
take climate
(CC)
action change
against (CC)
climate thermometer/cloud
thermometer/cloud
change (CC) thermometer/cloud
Contribute to better
Contribute
health,to better
wellbeing,
Contribute
health,
safety
to better
Contribute
wellbeing,
and security
health,
tosafety
betterand
health,
wellbeing,
(H)
Contribute to heart
security
safety
wellbeing,
(H)
better and security
safety
health, heart
and
(H) security
wellbeing, safety(H) heart
heartsecurity (H)
and heart

on those pedestrians, cyclists and equestrians who of the following objectives and outcomes:
Create better places
Create(BP)
better places
Create(BP)
betterCreate
placesbetter
(BP) places
Create (BP) google(BP)
better places pin/ tree/sunshine
google pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ tree/sunshine

share the same space. This can significantly impact
on the level of interaction within communities
located in these areas. Those who live on streets
5 1-3 3 1 1-4
with higher traffic levels are likely to have fewer
social interactions within their neighbourhood.
Building on the general West of England challenges The main interventions that will support the
identified in Section 2, more specific challenges for delivery of the policy, are:
neighbourhood connectivity have been identified,
as follows:
l Improve the quality of streets and public realm

l The dominance of traffic restricting the ability
l Prioritise walking, cycling and public transport
to reprioritise road space to other modes and into new developments
improve public realm l Provide clear wayfinding and signage
l Perception of safety and security issues l Improve and maintain Public Rights of Way
deterring use of active modes
l Lack of knowledge on making seamless door-to- Improve the quality of streets and public
door journeys by modes other than the private realm
car, resulting in more private car trips being
made in neighbourhoods than necessary Major roads can provide a barrier to accessibility
in neighbourhoods, segregating residential areas,
services and facilities. There is growing recognition
Neighbourhood policies and that high levels of car use and congestion are not
interventions conducive to the creation of vibrant and attractive
urban areas and have a determining impact on how
Neighbourhood connectivity in the West of England people choose to travel the first and last mile. High
will support delivery of the JLTP4 objectives, by quality public streets and spaces, that allow people
focussing on these main policies: to move more seamlessly, are an essential part of
l N1: Use master planning and local design to successful urban environments and how people
create better places choose to travel for longer trips.

l N2: Facilitate the use of active modes for all New developments
short trips, including the first and last mile of Through the planning process, new developments
longer journeys will be required to fully embrace, nurture and
respond to the distinctive characteristics and
The policies will be delivered by focussing on
features of the area surrounding them. This will
specific interventions.
support the protection and enhancement of the
diverse range of places within the West of England.

111
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 9:
Neighbourhood connectivity continued

We will look to ensure that new developments are Thornbury, Weston- super-Mare and Yate and
designed to: Chipping Sodbury we will work with Town and
Parish councils to deliver a strategic approach to
l Positively contribute to an area’s character transport improvements.
and identity, creating or reinforcing local
distinctiveness We will openly work with town and parish
councils, informed by residents and
l Provide safe and welcoming public space that neighbourhood groups, to develop Neighbourhood
promotes walking, cycling and convenient Plans.
transition to public transport
Crucially, adopted Neighbourhood Plans can
l Strengthen physical connections with secure funding for identified transport and access
surrounding areas and key destinations proposals via the Community Infrastructure Levy
l Create vibrant resilient and healthy (CIL). Areas with Neighbourhood Plans receive
communities a greater share of CIL income, which can, at the
discretion of that local area, be spent on transport
Urban Living, a central plank of regional and local and access improvements. As local authorities
planning, requires the creation of compact, high work with communities to develop the plans, it
density, characterful urban areas where people can ensures that holistic, joined up thinking is behind
live, work and socialise with good access to public the improvements that work for the benefit of all.
transport. For major development sites these
attributes will be considered at an early stage Improvements that could encourage pedestrian
through master planning and Local Plan policies. and cycle activity and provide safer, more
sustainable neighbourhood journeys can be
Community participation and Neighbourhood identified with support from local active travel
Plans groups (including Sustrans) and by working
To thrive, neighbourhoods need to be places that with town and parish councils and designated
enable people to be safe, healthy and interact with neighbourhood planning areas. These could include
their neighbours. Neighbourhoods need to facilitate improved footways, cycleways, crossing points,
community participation, enabling easy access to traffic calming measures and improved bus stop
facilities, like shops and schools, for all sectors of infrastructure and access. With more people able
the population. to access local facilities, including open areas and
parks, and businesses via walking and cycling, the
Neighbourhood Plans can be prepared to promote perception of local areas will be improved as more
greater community ownership, cohesion and pride. people are out and about, with resulting impacts on
They can give neighbourhoods greater control improving public health.
over improvements to transport, connectivity and
community facilities. This enables communities We will provide support to neighbourhoods in
to shape the future of their neighbourhoods and identifying improvements for inclusion in their
provide a consistent basis for what development Neighbourhood Plans.
and transport proposals would be welcomed.
It will be important to improve and strengthen
connectivity in our towns. With proposed local plan
development and major transport improvements
in and around towns such as Keynsham, Nailsea,

112
March 2020

streets and spaces across the centre, and by
rebalancing the movement hierarchy.
Case study: Highway Sustainable In Bath, the Council adopted the Public Realm and
urban Drainage System (SuDS), Bristol Movement Strategy for Bath City Centre in March
A pilot highway SuDS scheme was designed 2010. The strategy forms a key component of the
in partnership with Sustrans and in close Council’s Future for Bath Vision which seeks to
consultation with the local community. revitalise Bath’s economic, social and cultural
The scheme saw the construction of four wellbeing up to 2026 and beyond. The strategy
highway SuDS ‘pods’ and a storage basin. was founded on a thorough appreciation of the
The SuDS pods effectively replaced existing historic development and design values of the
nearby gullies and were constructed to city and puts forward an incremental plan for
accommodate highway runoff and store transforming the public realm and in doing so
water beneath the ground before releasing it creates a canvas for a more animated and inclusive
slowly into existing sewers beneath the road. public life. Following the successful adoption of
The benefits of SuDS systems are that they the strategy other authorities have produced their
slow the flow of water in the sewer network, own similar strategies that set out how progressive
which increases their capacity and reduces improvements to the public realm help to underpin
flood risk. a coherent long-term vision and delivery plan for
the revitalisation of our historic environment.
The pods are topped by soil and plants,
so they clean the water and increase local
biodiversity, as well as creating a more
visually attractive environment. They also act
as traffic calming, which is important given
their location outside a primary school. The
detailed designs of the pods were completed Case study: Weston-super-Mare
by internal BCC teams and have been public realm and pedestrian and
adopted by BCC as Highway Authority. cycle improvements
In October 2017 NSC was granted £2.95m
National Productivity Investment Fund
Design guidance documents and Supplementary money from DfT, and £1.5m from the LEP’s
Planning Documents Local Growth Fund, for a series of WsM
town centre public realm and pedestrian/
The growing importance of improving our
cycle improvements (Phase 1), with an
streets and places has been recognised through
integrated bus interchange coming as
the development of bespoke design guidance
a second phase (Weston Town Centre
documents for the cities of Bath and Bristol.
Transport Enhancement Scheme). The bid
Bristol’s draft City Centre Framework sets out a
was successful as reducing traffic dominance
vision for how people will move around Bristol
and improving public space via pedestrian/
city centre and how their movement experience
cycle improvements is recognised as key in
will be improved. Likewise, Bath’s Public Realm
unlocking key town centre regeneration sites
and Movement Strategy seeks to revitalise the
and attracting high-quality residential and
economic, social and cultural wellbeing up to 2026
employment developments.
and beyond, by putting forward a plan to transform

113
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 9:
Neighbourhood connectivity continued

We will support the implementation of local
design guides to improve streets and places.
B&NES adopted their Placemaking Plan in July Case Study: Bristol public realm
2017, which includes a multi-faceted approach improvements
to the planning, design and management of new In Bristol, public realm schemes have been
development and spaces. North Somerset Council used to reclaim areas of the city centre
have an adopted Weston-super-Mare Town Centre from motor transport. This has created
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) that improved public spaces and places, with
sets the agenda for the regeneration of the town wide-reaching benefits. For example, to
centre. This includes design codes and a context protect the historic environment, major roads
of regenerating and improving town centre space. adjacent to the Cathedral and through the
Higher density developments with more relaxed Grade I listed Queen Square were removed
parking standards are encouraged, to improve in the 1990s. The metrobus scheme has led
town centre space for active travel modes and to the removal of traffic from key sections
reduce traffic dominance to bring benefits for of Bristol city centre, improving the public
people and businesses. realm and creating an improved setting
for the cenotaph. The Temple Gate scheme
Improved opportunities to travel by active modes will remove road space from private cars,
will enable people to access local shops and but improve public transport interchange
businesses, supporting the viability of these and provide better access to Temple Meads
services. Providing sufficient parking outside of Station.
central areas and encouraging people to walk
reasonable distances, ‘Park & Stride’, will reduce
the number of cars and support the rebalancing of attractive, vibrant places to live, work and visit.
the network in favour of active modes. Improving This will enhance the attractiveness, appearance
the street environment for all road users will and safety of these centres to make them attractive
ensure our urban areas remain or become to businesses, shoppers and the community.
Feeling safe is an important factor for people in
deciding their transport choices, such as whether
they feel safe waiting at a bus stop at night. This
Case Study: Bristol retailers has gender equality implications, as it is well-
A study in Bristol found that retailers reported that women often feel less safe than men
on a local high street overestimated the being out alone after dark. This means that for
proportion of shoppers arriving by car by everyone, the design of walking and cycling routes,
almost double at 41% compared with the the siting of bus stops, cycle parking and other
actual proportion of 22%. The retailers also transport interchanges, especially in the inner
underestimated how far pedestrians had city and in rural areas, is an extremely important
travelled to get to the high street; over 60% consideration in planning to encourage the shift to
lived within 1 mile. As well as the benefit of more sustainable travel choices.
improved public realm, the study showed We will invest in our public places and rebalance
that pedestrians generally visited more shops transport and movement systems in favour
than those arriving by car. of pedestrians, cyclists and public transport
users. This includes delivery of public realm
114
March 2020

improvement packages in Keynsham and in We will work with DEFRA to support them in the
Midsomer Norton and Somer Valley, including identification of appropriate mitigation measures
links to the Somer Valley Enterprise Zone. to protect the quietness of open spaces, and
provide our partners, including Highways England
As well as its role in enhancing places by making and the rail industry, with these aspirations
them more accessible, transport can equally harm to guide them in tackling noise as part of
the quality of a place. It has, and will continue to management plans.
have, an impact on the built, historic and natural
environment. Transport can make a positive contribution
to the natural environment, by using green
Improvements to some of the area’s historic infrastructure as part of scheme design. Green
streets and settlements will hopefully become infrastructure is a planned network of green
possible by reducing the volume of traffic using spaces and corridors in and around our towns
those historic streets and spaces. The management and cities, which are designed to protect and
of the highway network, particularly in areas enhance local communities, wildlife and the
of historic significance, needs to continue to be environment. The West of England’s emerging
undertaken with the context of the historic built Joint Green Infrastructure Strategy (JGIS)
environment and include reducing the impact of provides context for green infrastructure delivery
signage, road markings and the impact of traffic and supports individual Local Plan approaches
calming. Infrastructure should be designed to green infrastructure. Existing guidance
sensitively to reduce visual impact and to include suggests cycle ways, paving and parking should
effective landscaping scheme to soften any major consider permeable construction first, then look
structures. Any new infrastructure should take at providing green infrastructure alongside the
account of the same design criteria required for route, before considering traditional drainage. This
new developments. brings benefits to communities and the natural
Where possible, the public realm in these areas environment.
will be enhanced to both protect important We will work to ensure transport scheme design
buildings and locations, in tandem with working to and upgrades contribute to the creation of
improve public spaces, and address the impacts increased levels of resilient green infrastructure,
of noise. The development of strategic transport in line with the emerging JGIS.
related initiatives needs to ensure that the
historic environment is recognised and taken into
consideration. Prioritise walking, cycling and public transport
into new developments
Excessive noise pollution caused by high volumes
of motor traffic has been linked with an increased Higher development densities and a mix of land
risk of heart attack, obesity, impaired sleep and uses can encourage more local travel patterns and
mental health problems. People living in areas with reduce journey lengths. Urban Living is a central
high traffic noise are 25 percent more likely than plank of regional and local planning,, optimising
those in quieter neighbourhoods to have symptoms opportunities for development in urban areas
of depression. Noise management measures that and previously developed land. By working with
might be appropriate, feasible and affordable are those developing these polices, we can drive
likely to include renewal of carriageways, targeted the sustainable delivery of developments and
maintenance, noise barriers, speed limits and road provide the opportunity to minimise the need to
hierarchy reviews. travel and allow safe and convenient access to

115
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 9:
Neighbourhood connectivity continued

services by walking, cycling and public transport. of our walking and cycling network, including
Developers will be engaged with right at the start strategic cycle routes, is critical to providing access
of the planning process to achieve this. This will to local services and to ongoing economic growth.
include, where appropriate, the encouragement of
new housing with car-free areas (with car parking, We will work with developers to ensure they
where required, located outside of the living areas) are using existing street design principles, but
to encourage more social interactions and walking. increasingly focus on providing an attractive,
All new developments will need to cater for all integrated network that offers segregated areas
levels of mobility however, to not exclude those for active modes, if required.
with mobility impairments. We will work with developers to ensure the
We will continue to encourage new developments high-quality walking and cycling infrastructure
in locations that are accessible by existing provided on-site does not stop at the site
walking, cycling and public transport networks, boundary, but integrates into the wider walking
and discourage proposals that fail to actively and cycling network, facilitating seamless onward
encourage mode shift away from the private car. active travel for the necessary journeys between
villages, towns and city neighbourhoods.
We will require developers to make developments
‘bus friendly’ by reference to guidance published In the interests of limiting safety implications
in 2017. and maintenance liabilities both during and after
construction, local planning authorities will engage
We will engage with developers at the start of with developers over construction materials of
the planning process to ensure key services to be the walking and cycling network improvements.
provided on site, based on the thresholds included The individual pedestrian and cycle strategies of
in guidance, are high-quality, but also in the best the West of England authorities will also provide
location to maximise their accessibility via active further design guidance and principles.
travel modes and public transport.
For smaller development sites that do not require Provide clear wayfinding and signage
the provision of on-site facilities or services, The design of transport schemes and new
there will be a stronger emphasis on working infrastructure will consider the needs of walkers,
with developers for transport improvements and cyclists and equestrians. A simple and intuitive
mitigations to include high quality, direct walking approach to wayfinding and signage will be
and cycling linkages to off-site local facilities. adopted, including for Public Rights of Way such
Accessibility is maximised through a consistent as bridleways and restricted byways. Signage and
walking and cycling-focused street pattern, infrastructure for pedestrians and cyclists will be
ensuring the necessary safe and direct cross-site designed to be sympathetic to local distinctiveness
permeability that makes active travel attractive. whilst remaining clear, visible and informative.
Clear priority for pedestrians and cyclists at Streets and places often suffer from a proliferation
junctions should be incorporated, wherever of traffic and directional signs. The approach
possible. With integrated on-site provision and will be used in the design of new schemes and
access, more trips are retained within local areas the improvement to existing streets and places.
so people are not forced to travel to access basic Technology offers further opportunities to reduce
services, thereby encouraging the use of more the number and type of signs and influence the
active modes. The improvement and expansion way people get directions to move around. Smart

116
March 2020

phones and interactive maps can play a significant
role going forward, and innovations and emerging
technology will be built on, as discussed in Section Case study: Public realm
5, to maximise the benefits this can bring. improvements in Bath
We will develop an approach to signage The High Street Public Realm Improvement
that focusses on consistency and minimises Scheme in Bath was completed in June
duplication, building on opportunities offered by 2013. The High Street did not provide a
technology, as they arise. welcoming or enjoyable experience for
pedestrians or bus users. The combination
Improve and maintain Public Rights of Way of narrow footways, busy bus stops and
high footfall often resulted in overcrowding.
Public Rights of Way have a role to play in The new scheme created a more pedestrian
providing access for pedestrians, cyclists and friendly environment, through the expansion
equestrians. Rights of Way Improvement Plans of pedestrian areas, new street furniture
(ROWIP) are central in supporting the maintenance including bus shelters, wayfinding signage,
of Public Rights of Way, which offer recreational cycle stands and the improved signalised
use across the West of England, as well as crossings. Together, the measures have
identifying actions to improve network connectivity created a more pedestrian friendly
and safety, including making the network easier to environment, enhanced the streetscape and
use and follow. afforded better access to public transport.
We support the safeguarding of Public Rights Pedestrian improvements to Stall Street and
of Way in development in terms of their utility, Lower Borough Walls in Bath were completed
amenity and safety. Any new routes proposed or in late 2015. This busy thoroughfare carried
being reviewed should be designed for use by around 25,000 pedestrians per day. By
pedestrians, cyclists and equestrian users, unless cutting vehicle traffic, the space is now more
evidence deems a class of use as inappropriate in a pleasant for local people and visitors to shop
specific location. and socialise. Drawing on the same guiding
principles as the High Street scheme, new
In identifying and developing new Public Rights
traffic restrictions were implemented during
of Way or active travel routes, the needs of
core shopping hours. This was combined with
pedestrians, cyclists and equestrian users will be
improvements to the public realm through
considered and provided for, wherever possible.
the use of shared space to make the area
much more pleasant for pedestrians and
cyclists.

117
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 9:
Neighbourhood connectivity continued

N2. Facilitate the use of active modes for
all short trips, including the first and last
mile of longer journeys Case study:
Low Traffic Neighbourhoods:
Support sustainable and Support
inclusive
sustainable
economic
Support
sustainable
and inclusive
Support economic
sustainable
growthand(EG) (EG)
inclusive
economic
growth
inclusiveand graph
£ orgrowth of
economic(EG) £ or
arrows
growth increasing
graph
(EG) arrows
increasing
graph of
arrows
of£ or
increasing
or graph
arrows
of £ increasing Waltham Forest Mini-Holland
This policy contributes towards the delivery
Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth (EG) £ or graph of arrows increasing
Enable equality and
Enable
improve
equality and improve and improve
equality
accessibility
Enable
(EA)
equality
accessibility
Enable Enable improve
accessibility
and
(EA) equal
accessibility
(EA)
equality and sign
improve sign or
door
equal
open
or(EA)
accessibility equaldoor
dooror open
opensign
sign orequal
equaldoor
open
(EA) sign or open door
Address poor airAddress
quality and
poortake
air
Address
quality
actionpoor
against
andAddress
air
take
quality
climate
action against
take
change
poorand
air
Address action
climate
quality
(CC)
poor thermometer/cloud
andair
against
take
change
action
qualityclimate
(CC)
and thermometer/cloud
against
change
take climate
(CC)
action change
against (CC)
climate thermometer/cloud
thermometer/cloud
change (CC) thermometer/cloud

The London Borough of Waltham Forest,
Contribute to better
Contribute
health,to better
wellbeing,
Contribute
health,
safety
to better
Contribute
wellbeing,
and security
health,
tosafety
betterand
health,
wellbeing,
(H)
Contribute to heart
security
safety
wellbeing,
(H)
better and security
safety
health, heart
and
(H) security
wellbeing, safety(H) heart
heartsecurity (H)
and heart

of the following objectives and outcomes:
Create better places
Create(BP)
better places
Create(BP)
betterCreate
placesbetter
(BP) places
Create (BP) google(BP)
better places pin/ tree/sunshine
google pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ google
tree/sunshine
pin/ tree/sunshine

through its Liveable Neighbourhood project,
has bucked the trend of worsening air
quality, and over the course of a decade,
2 1 1 1 1 reduced the number of residents exposed to
dangerous levels of nitrous oxides by 85%.
The council engaged closely with residents
The main interventions that will support the and businesses, involving them as closely
delivery of the policy, are: as possible with the project through design
workshops, drop-in sessions, and door-
l Work with residents and communities to identify knocking. Changes on the ground in Waltham
barriers to accessibility Forest have involved giving pedestrians and
l Support the provision of safe crossings and cyclists priority and junctions, with widened
speed reduction in appropriate locations pavements and segregated cycle tracks, and
removing the opportunities for rat-running
l Improve actual and perceived personal security through residential streets.
Although there was some initial resistance
Work with residents and communities to to the changes, Waltham Forest is seeing
identify barriers to accessibility significant behaviour change, with more
The first and last mile trip concept is particularly people from a range of backgrounds starting
relevant in neighbourhoods, as mode choice for to cycle, and increased life expectancy for
longer trips is likely to be determined by the the borough’s children. While schemes to
choices available to travel the first mile i.e. from prevent through traffic were initially divisive,
home. The first and last mile of longer journeys to follow-up evaluation of the schemes revealed
key destinations such as employment and leisure a change in attitudes, and local businesses
sites should be targeted for switching to active have flourished since through-traffic bans
modes. This will be supported by, and build on the were introduced.
benefits being generated, from shorter trips being
made by non-car modes.
local destinations. The importance of reduced traffic
Reducing the number of neighbourhood car on equestrian links, can also not be overlooked in
journeys can have wide reaching benefits. some areas.
Journeys within neighbourhoods are short, and
for pedestrians, most neighbourhoods already Where traffic levels can be reduced through
have an extensive network of footways and Public enabling more shorter journeys to be made by foot
Rights of Way. Fewer car journeys can increase the or bicycle, opportunities can be taken to provide
attractiveness of other modes, such as the use of public realm improvements. It also enables roads
scooters, particularly by younger children, to access to more effectively accommodate the longer, more

118
March 2020

difficult trips that are necessary via public transport Support the provision of safe crossings and
and the private car. Parking and traffic speeds can speed reduction in appropriate locations
be more effectively managed, so they do not harm
or hinder local neighbourhood access and facilities. To provide safer roads for all modes, evidence-
Opportunities will also be taken, where appropriate, based guidance will be developed to determine
to create ‘road cells’ in residential areas, where appropriate speed limits according to road features
groups of streets are closed with limited access and function and encourage increased enforcement.
points/one way (with contraflow for cyclists), or bus Those roads with highest risk, particularly for
gates, residential traffic restrictions to manage rat- walking and cycling, will be identified and schemes
running and provide a quieter space for residents, to manage speed and traffic volumes where there is
pedestrians and cyclists. The removal of through evidence of safety problems will be prioritised.
traffic and increased permeability will provide more We will design and maintain our highway network
direct routes for trips by foot and bicycle. to reduce the risk of collisions occurring.
We recognise that availability of public transport Reduced traffic speeds can improve the actual and
is not feasible in all neighbourhoods. However, perceived safety of roads, and influence decisions
support will be provided to public transport about mode choice. In neighbourhoods where
services penetrating neighbourhoods, wherever speeds are identified as a factor in deterring people
feasible. Integrating and promoting different types from walking and cycling, community participation
of public transport can also enable better door to will be encouraged to identify interventions that will
door connections from the neighbourhood level, support residents in walking and cycling, enhancing
such as the use of ferries to reach key destinations accessibility. This may include speed reduction
throughout Bristol city centre. Walking and cycling measures, particularly close to local services; more
to/from public transport services can play a large cycle provision to create a wider network of safer
role in encouraging physical activity and improving routes; and measures to address areas with a high-
health. Knowledge and accessibility to legible risk or incident of collisions.
information are required about how to travel
without a private car, supporting equal access We will support the provision of safe crossings and
opportunities for people in all neighbourhoods. speed reduction in appropriate locations.
Another measure that we will consider is the
In 2013, the Department for Transport (DfT) issued
creation of Low Traffic Neighbourhoods. This is a
guidelines for the introduction of 20mph speed
similar concept to TfL’s Liveable Neighbourhoods
limits. Both Bristol City Council and B&NES have
as described in the Waltham Forest case study. In
introduced 20mph limits, primarily along residential
Low Traffic Neighbourhoods motor traffic is either
roads. 20mph limits consist of a speed limit change
discouraged or removed, typically resulting in
to 20mph, opposed to 20mph zones, which are
reduced traffic speeds, and quieter and safer feeling
accompanied by some form of traffic calming
streets. This change to the physical environment
measures. Alongside the introduction of 20mph
enables and encourages residents and visitors to
limits it is important to work alongside the Police to
switch to more healthy and active modes such as
ensure continued enforcement.
walking and cycling.
Following the introduction of 20mph limit schemes,
We will support and promote opportunities for first
Bristol City Council commissioned a review into
and last mile trips being made by non-car modes.
their effectiveness which was carried out by the
University of West of England. The review found

119
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 9:
Neighbourhood connectivity continued

Case study: 20mph speed limit roll out in
Bristol
The 20mph speed limit roll out started in 2010, part of a broader package of measures aimed
with 2 pilot areas. Wider roll out took place to give children more confidence to walk,
in 2014, and was completed in September scoot, and cycle. Other measures include bus
2015. 20mph limit was introduced as part of a improvements, travel plans for schools and
wider package of transport measures aimed business, local safety schemes all of which will
to improve road safety, increase active travel help increase active travel which is great for
and create more pleasant communities. Other your health.
measures include bus improvements, cycle
In February 2018, the Bristol Twenty Miles Per
infrastructure improvements, local safety
Hour Limit Evaluation (BRITE) study, carried out
schemes and major transport schemes such as
by the University of the West of England (UWE),
metrobus and rail improvement.
assessed the impact that 20mph speed limits
The roll-out of 20mph speed limits across may have had since they were introduced in
Bristol’s residential streets and some local high 2014 and 2015. The results showed there had
streets is a signs-only based intervention. This been a reduction in road speeds and fatalities
relies on driver adherence to the posted ‘20mph’ following road collisions since the lower speeds
speed limit denoted by speed limit signs on were introduced. It found the city has seen a
entry to the limit area, and repeater signs within reduction of 4 deaths, 11 serious injuries and
the area (complying with DfT requirements). 159 slight injuries each year, and the level of
20mph zones are different because these active travel in Bristol has increased, with more
include physical traffic calming measures. The people walking or cycling for 10 minutes or
20mph speed limits are legally enforceable, like more in their local area most days.
any other speed limit.
Over 94% of the roads surveyed had seen
Lowering the speed helps make streets safer for slower speeds, with drivers on all 20mph roads
all roads users, as those hit by a car at 20mph driving, on average, at speeds less than 24mph.
are far more likely to walk away with bruises Day speeds were found to have reduced by an
and minor injuries than those hit at 30mph. average 2.7mph, with night speeds falling by an
It also helps to increase cycling and walking, average 2.4mph. Previous statistics suggest that
by making communities more pleasant places with every 1mph reduction in speed, the risk of a
to live and reduces anti-social road noise. fatal or serious injury caused by a road collision
Slower speeds on roads help to make walking falls by 6 per cent.
or cycling more attractive options. 20mph is

120
March 2020

that the 20mph limit schemes have led to ‘very Work will continue with the police on a ‘secure by
promising’ improvements in road safety (see design’ project. This incorporates security into the
case study below). Bristol City Council has since design of streets and places, rather than having
committed to carry out its own review of the to add features to improve security later. Advice
effectiveness of 20mph speed limits. will also continue to be sought on the measures
required to protect against errant vehicles. This
The Department for Transport is currently will include identifying locations and instances
undertaking their own research into the where there might be a need for measures to
effectiveness of introducing 20mph speed limits protect against vehicles used as weapons.
on roads.
We will work with crime prevention officers and
Improve actual and perceived personal the police to ensure security considerations are
security incorporated in our scheme designs.

The perception of risk surrounding personal
security is an important influence for journey
planning. Fear and apprehension about personal
security can affect all aspects of travel choice,
such as route, the mode of transport used and the
time of journey, and whether to travel at all. If we
are to achieve the step change in active travel and
public transport usage we are aiming for, personal
security considerations need to be explicitly
incorporated into decisions concerning the design,
planning, operation and management of transport
systems. This has become increasingly pertinent,
following terrorist attacks targeting or using
transport.
We will use natural surveillance and careful
design when improving our streets and public
places, to increase the numbers of individuals on
our streets and make them feel safer.
Crime prevention officers will be involved as early
as possible in scheme designs. This will ensure
factors such as lighting, clear lines of sight and
CCTV are included, based on local knowledge
and in the context of existing crime factors in the
vicinity.

121
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 9:
Neighbourhood connectivity continued

122
March 2020

Section 10:
Funding and implementation
Introduction the UK. It will be critical for the West of England
to make a compelling and collective case for
This Joint Local Transport Plan is intentionally investment, through working in partnership with
ambitious. It will require an unprecedented level transport operators and providers, other delivery
of both capital (one-time investment of money to agencies and wider stakeholders. Our success
deliver assets) and revenue (day to day running depends very much on this partnership approach.
costs) funding, with a large acceleration in
spending from current levels. Although long-term Evidence shows that investment in the West of
aspirations to transform the way we move around England is lower than in other parts of England.
the West of England will be costly to deliver, The National Infrastructure Pipeline shows that £18
costs of active travel measures are comparatively billion was programmed to be spent on transport
low and could contribute towards meeting our in the UK in 2016/17, equivalent to 1% of UK GDP.
objectives in the shorter term. If this benchmark is applied to the South West
of England, this would be equivalent to around
The total cost of delivering the schemes set out in £1.4 billion per annum. However, analyses show
the Joint Transport Study (JTS) Transport Vision that spending in the South West was around
was estimated to be at least £8.9 billion in future £390 million in 2015/16, dropping to around £300
outturn prices. The programme is equivalent to million between 2015/16 and 2020/21 (or £540
expenditure of £450-600 million per annum, which million per annum including the A303 Stonehenge
is a step change from historic and current spend. tunnel). This is less than half the expenditure that
could be expected in the region, if the national 1%
The JTS assumed the four-line mass transit
benchmark were to be applied.
network would cost approx. £2.5bn to deliver,
and if there is a need to deliver some sections The Government has made a commitment to
underground, this cost will rise further. The increase the proportion of national GDP spent on
delivery of modern tram and light rail systems economic infrastructure to prepare the country
in Birmingham, Edinburgh, Greater Manchester, for the future. The West of England is the most
Newcastle, Nottingham and Sheffield demonstrate productive part of the South West and is one of
that mass transit systems can be funded and the UK’s best performing city regions. However,
delivered in UK cities outside London and provide there has been historic under investment that has
examples for how such interventions can be contributed towards current transport challenges.
funded. There is, therefore, a strong case for increased
investment to support the continued growth of the
The Devolution Deal for the West of England
area.
includes guaranteed funding of £1bn infrastructure
investment over 30 years, equating to £30m a There has been a consistent lack of long-term
year, which is unprecedented for the area and revenue funding, with projects and programmes
this certainty of funds will help to unlock further such as Local Sustainable Transport Fund
financing opportunities. (delivering travel behaviour change), running for a
maximum of four years. Revenue budget pressures
Current situation are likely to continue. We will look to address this
There is an increasingly strong case for through the potential funding sources below.
infrastructure investment to improve society and
support economic growth, but the Government is
facing competing demands from different parts of

123
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 10:
Funding and implementation continued

The funding gap
Figure 10.1 shows the scale of the funding gap. schemes. It is important to note that the JTS
This is based on current levels of funding for the Transport Vision cost does not include all the
JTS Transport Vision. It shows at least a £6bn schemes/policies within this JLTP4 and assumes a
funding gap to deliver the JTS Transport Vision £2.5bn cost for the mass transit network.

Figure 10.1: JTS schemes funding gap

£ millions

10000 JTS schemes funding gap

8000
Funding gap
£6bn + Typical bidding funding
Funding gap Typical major scheme funding
6000
Core strategy developer funding (65,000 dwellings)
Developer contributions
4000 WECA Gainshare
Network Rail (renewals only)
Highways England
2000

0
Note: Scheme cost estimates as of spring/summer 2018

124
March 2020

A number of assumptions have been made about We will ensure we are kept both well informed and
potential funding sources, which have been used to well prepared for new short-term funding sources
prepare Figure 10.1: from central Government and other partners, to
continue to deliver existing work, as well as the
l Typical bidding and major scheme funding was new interventions contained within JLTP4.
calculated using the approximate income from
these streams over the past 10 years However, it is unrealistic to assume that central
Government will entirely fill the funding gap,
l Developer contributions of £3,000 per dwelling. particularly given competing demands for funding,
This is an assumed average across the region, and local sources of significant additional funding
and actual contributions are likely to vary will be needed to deliver this JLTP4.
significantly based on the location and specific
site condition Raising additional local income will involve some
difficult decisions. Potential local funding options
l Not all WECA gainshare funding will be spent on that could be considered are:
transport
l Community Infrastructure Levy – a planning
l Approximately half of total bidding, major charge for new development to pay for local
scheme, and WECA Gainshare funding will be infrastructure
spent on mitigating the impact of future growth
and half will be spent on improving existing l Highways England Shadow Toll – funding from
conditions and mitigating the impact of existing Highways England for schemes that reduce
Core Strategy growth (approx. 60,000 dwellings) pressure on the Strategic Road Network
l Network Rail fund renewals (maintenance) only l Council Tax Precept – increasing council tax for
residents of the West of England
l Highways England fund all improvements
on their network including Smart Motorways l Business Rate Supplement – increasing rates
and new junctions. This assumption is likely for businesses in the West of England
to be overly ambitious and a significant local
contribution will be needed towards Highways
l Workplace Parking Levy – employers are
England schemes charged for having private parking spaces. This
charge can be passed on to employees who use
the spaces
Additional sources of funding
l Road Pricing, for example congestion charging
It is of note that there are areas of JLTP4 which to drive into specific areas
are currently being delivered through grant
funding from central Government, which local l Revenue raised from Mass Transit services
authorities may not be able to continue delivering l Clean Air Fund and CAZ Implementation Fund
with increasing pressures on revenue budgets. A
key area that could be affected is the behaviour l Public Health funding
change work taking place with businesses, schools
and communities through the Access WEST Not all measures could/should be implemented
Programme, which will conclude in March 2020, together. For example, a business rate supplement
with a view to extending the programme through and Workplace Parking Levy both impact on
future funding sources. local businesses. Local contributions are likely to
provide less than half the funding gap, particularly

125
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 10:
Funding and implementation continued

as only a sub-set of the local funding options could
be implemented.
The introduction of charging mechanisms, such Case study: Nottingham Workplace
as road pricing covering the Bristol and Bath Parking Levy
urban areas, would raise a significant amount of Nottingham introduced a Workplace Parking
revenue. This would help fill the funding gap and Levy in 2011. It levies a charge to employers
raise revenue for infrastructure delivery, but would that have 11 or more private parking spaces
be extremely challenging to deliver. Phasing will on their site. Over £61m has been raised
need to be considered carefully in order to ensure in revenue since charging began. The
that effective alternatives to private car use are administrative costs of running the scheme
implemented in tandem with the roll-out of any take less than 5% of the revenue raised,
charging mechanism. meaning a large amount is reinvested in
transport improvements in the city. The
The responses to our consultation simulator points funding has contributed to doubling the size
allocation exercise demonstrated the highest level of the tram network and redeveloping the
of support for the introduction of road pricing city’s rail station to supporting the electric
as a means of raising revenue for transport bus network. The revenue raised has also
improvement, with council tax increases showing been used as match funding to bid for
the lowest level of support. Feasibility studies and funding from other sources. Workplaces that
consultation will be carried out to determine the are required to pay the charge are offered
nature and extent of any charging mechanisms grants to enable staff to cycle to work.
that could be used in the West of England. This will
support the achievement of the JLTP4 objectives, The levy scheme has resulted in a 4.5%
particularly sustainable and inclusive economic increase in bus and tram patronage, building
growth, whilst not negatively impacting on the on already high levels. There were forecasts
needs of our people and places. of businesses deserting Nottingham for other
cities nearby, however in 2017 it was reported
that Nottingham has one of the fastest
growing economies of any UK city. The UK
Powerhouse City Growth Tracker from Irwin
Mitchell and the Centre for Business &
Economic research shows that Nottingham’s
year-on-year economic growth figure of
2.5% is on a par with Greater Manchester
and higher than Birmingham, Bristol, Leeds,
Liverpool, Newcastle and Sheffield.

126
March 2020

Section 11: Major schemes and
summary of interventions
Major schemes more ambitious schemes. Priorities and timescales
for delivery will depend on available funding and
The West of England’s Joint Transport Study (JTS) bidding opportunities from Central Government, as
sets out an ambitious vision for transport to 2036, well as the timing of new development sites.
identifying a programme of transport packages
that will transform the travel choices available to We will work with our transport delivery partners,
our residents and visitors. These, along with other Network Rail, Highways England and bus and train
schemes, are being taken forward as our major operators, to implement key rail, bus and road
transport schemes programme to support the schemes that are within their delivery remit. In
delivery of the JLTP4. summary, our programme will:

The region has made significant achievements l Explore potential transformational
during the seven years of JLTP3, spending over infrastructure schemes to address our existing
£500m on the delivery of transport projects, challenges
including a number of major schemes such as the l Ensure the core of our future transport
Greater Bristol Bus Network, the launch of the first programme demonstrates that the
three metrobus routes, and the completion of the requirements of future growth will be met
Bath and Weston-super-Mare Transport Packages.
Significant investment towards a number of major l Show that we can deliver in the short-term as
schemes has also been made by Highways England well as advancing a transformational longer-
(including into the expansion of Smart Motorways term programme
on the M4 and M5) and by Network Rail (including
electrification).
l Be delivered in partnership with our transport
partners with responsibility for the strategic
This major transport schemes programme is our road and rail network
most ambitious yet, continuing and expanding on
scheme delivery during JLTP3. It includes schemes The major transport schemes set out in this
set out in the JTS, which in total have a value of at section are those costing over £10m, many of
least £8.9 billion over twenty years, and which were which are unaffordable from our existing, regular
assessed as being necessary to counter the extent funding sources. The current situation and the
of forecast growth in car commuting over this various challenges and opportunities for funding
period. It will require a step change in investment are discussed in more detail above in Section 10:
to provide transformational infrastructure that Funding and implementation.
responds both to the existing transport challenges, Figure 11.1 presents, in diagrammatic form,
and our Core Strategy growth. Investment will the schemes included in our major schemes
also be required to address future transport programme, which are at very different stages
challenges including the increased demand for of development. Tables 11.1 to 11.6 provide a
travel associated with the growth and housing to summary of the type, cost range, and delivery
be identified through future strategic planning. timescale of each scheme. The definition of
The packages have a strong focus on encouraging categories within each of the summary tables
active and sustainable transport as a preferred is provided in Appendix 3.
choice for more people.
Transport schemes take time to deliver. We will
invest early to create network capacity in the short
term, whilst continuing to work on the longer term,

127
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 11:
Major schemes and summary of interventions continued

Figure 11.1: JLTP4 major schemes

N

Thornbury

North Fringe

Avonmouth
Portishead

Bristol
Clevedon

Nailsea

Keynsham

Bristol Airport

Weston-super-Mare

Midsomer Norton

128
March 2020

public realm and sustainable
Charfield transport improvements
improved junctions
new junctions
improved road
new road
Yate transport infrastructure
smart motorway
cycle routes
improved rail station
new rail station
rail improvements
metrobus
other bus route improvements
mass transit
expanded Park & Ride site
new Park & Ride site
Bath

Alignments and locations are for illustrative purposes and subject
to feasibility studies and consultation.

129
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 11:
Major schemes and summary of interventions continued

All proposed transport schemes will be reviewed l Bath corridors and the city centre
on an ongoing basis against the emerging evidence
base for meeting our jointly stated ambition of Transformational infrastructure in the form of
carbon neutral emissions by 2030. This will be mass transit (e.g. light rail, tram, tram-train or
looked at in the context of the proposed physical underground) is identified for these corridors.
infrastructure, the mode of transport using This is necessary to provide a step change in
any new infrastructure, its effects on the wider the capacity and quality of public transport on
transport network and environment in the West the busiest corridors, that can respond to the
of England, future spatial planning and emerging significant forecast increase in trips across the
technology. We will also continue to lobby region. It will also provide a more attractive
government to give clarity on national targets for alternative to trips by car. In some locations, it will
decarbonisation of transport and energy to be be very challenging to achieve on-street running,
embedded in local transport policy and projects. particularly on routes through East Bristol, North
Bristol and through some parts of South Bristol
and on the Bristol to Bath corridor. Feasibility work
Transformational has commenced to investigate how potential mass
To provide realistic and attractive alternatives transit corridors could be delivered.
to the private car, a fully integrated public The total cost of delivering our transformational
transport network will be developed. This includes major schemes package is £3bn-£5bn. A summary
improvements to the bus network, an expanded of the type, cost and timescale of each scheme is
metrobus network, new Park & Ride sites and provided in Table 1 below. Further detail on the
enhanced rail services. schemes can be found in Appendix 3.
There are, however, corridors with very high Our mass transit network will take between 10
passenger flows where there is limited spare and 20 years to deliver. Prior to the delivery of this
capacity to accommodate increased passenger network we will continue to expand our metrobus
demand. These corridors are: rapid transit network, which will see the opening
l Bristol city centre to East Fringe of several new routes across the region. In the
meantime, transport connectivity to these mass
l Bristol city centre to North Fringe and rapid transit networks will be improved,
through both metrobus and wider public transport
l Bristol city centre to Bristol Airport schemes, cycling, walking and car-sharing
l Bristol city centre to Bath initiatives.

Table 11.1: Transformational Major Schemes
Timescale
Ref Mode Connectivity Scheme Cost S M L
T1 Public Transport Within WofE Mass Transit – Bristol City Centre to Airport High
T2 Public Transport Within WofE Mass Transit – Bristol City Centre to Bath High
T3 Public Transport Within WofE Mass Transit – Bristol City Centre to East Fringe High
T4 Public Transport Within WofE Mass Transit – Bristol City Centre to North Fringe High
T5 Public Transport Within WofE Mass Transit – Bath City Centre and corridors High

130
March 2020

Early investment schemes (including Temple Quarter Enterprise Zone and work is
progressing on investment in Bristol Temple Meads
committed projects) station. Delivery of highways and other access
Early investment schemes have been identified to improvements will enable metrobus and cycling/
ensure a programme of works can be delivered in walking links in the Hengrove and Lockleaze
the short, medium and longer term of the JLTP4 Urban Living developments. Also, delivery of a
period up to 2036. Some packages have allocated new M49 junction to improve access to Severnside,
funding whilst others have partial funding allocated commenced in early 2019.
for delivery of feasibility studies, for example.
The total cost of delivering our package of
Committed schemes in progress committed early investment schemes is
£500m-£1bn. A summary of the type, cost and
Preparations for MetroWest Phases 1 and 2
timescale of each scheme being progressed is
continue to progress, which will significantly
provided in Table 11.2 below. Further details can be
improve rail travel across the area. Significant
found in Appendix 3.
works are taking place to improve access to

Table 11.2: Early investment schemes in progress (committed projects)
Timescale
Ref Mode Connectivity Scheme Cost S M L
C1 Freight Beyond WoE M49 Avonmouth junction Low
C2 Multimodal Beyond WoE Temple Quarter masterplan High
C3 Public Transport Within WoE MetroWest Phase 1 Med
C4 Public Transport Within WoE MetroWest Phase 2 Low
C5 Multimodal Local Hengrove Transport Package Low
C6 Multimodal Local Lockleaze Transport Package Low
C7 Public Transport Local Cribbs Causeway Metrobus Extension Low

131
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 11:
Major schemes and summary of interventions continued

Schemes under development each scheme. The total cost of delivering our
A number of other early investment schemes early investment schemes under development is
in support of delivering the JLTP4 strategy are currently estimated as £2bn-£2.5bn. Further details
at an earlier stage of development. Table 11.3 can be found in Appendix 3.
summarises the type, cost and timescale of

Table 11.3: Early investment schemes under development
Timescale
Ref Mode Connectivity Scheme Cost S M L
E1 Multimodal Beyond WoE Bristol South West Economic Link (BSWEL) High
E2 Multimodal Beyond WoE East of Bath access improvements Med
E3 Highway Beyond WoE M5 Junction 19 Low
E4 Public Transport Beyond WoE Passenger Rail Service and Capacity High
Improvements, Station Upgrades and New
Stations Package
E5 Highway Beyond WoE Smart Motorways: M4 J18-19 High
E6 Highway Beyond WoE M5 new junction J21A Med
E7 Highway Within WoE A4174 Ring Road junction improvements Med
including Wraxall Road (Longwell Green)
E8 Highway Within WoE Freezing Hill junction upgrade and whole route Low
improvements
E9 Active Travel Within WoE Interurban cycle routes – including North Low
Somerset Coastal Towns Cycle Route, and cycle
links to Yate and Thornbury
E10 Highway Within WoE M4 Junction 18A to A4174 Ring Road High
E11 Multimodal Within WoE Metrobus – Bristol City Centre to Clevedon and Med
Nailsea
E12 Public Transport Within WoE Metrobus consolidation package Med
E13 Public Transport Within WoE Sustainable travel package for Bath Low
E14 Other Within WoE Regional Electric Vehicle Charging Network Med
E15 Multimodal Within WoE Metrobus – Bristol City Centre to Severnside Low
E16 Active Travel Local Bath Cycle Network and City Centre Package Low
E17 Active Travel Local Keynsham / Midsomer Norton and Somer Valley Low
Public Realm Improvements Packages
E18 Multimodal Local Weston-super-Mare Package 2 Med
E19 Active Travel Local Weston-super-Mare Cycling and Walking Network Med

132
March 2020

Table 11.3: Early investment schemes under development continued

Timescale
Ref Mode Connectivity Scheme Cost S M L
E20 Multimodal Within WoE Banwell High
Housing A371 / A368 Banwell Bypass
Infrastructure
Bid
E21 Multimodal Within WoE South East Bristol and Whitchurch High
Infrastructure • A4 metrobus + Callington Road Link
Bid • Orbital metrobus
• A37 Sustainable Transport
• Hicks Gate Park & Ride/transport interchange
• Hicks Gate Junction
• South East Bristol Orbital Low Carbon Corridor
• Local highway improvements

E22 Multimodal Within WoE Keynsham Med
Infrastructure • Keynsham railway station
Bid • A4-A4175 corridor
• Local highway improvements

133
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 11:
Major schemes and summary of interventions continued

Joint Transport Study required
schemes
Transport infrastructure identified through the transport. Schemes will be developed through each
JTS will be required to unlock and facilitate future local authority’s Local Plan process.
development alongside maximising mode shift to
active and sustainable forms of travel and public These schemes are shown in Table 11.4. Further
detail on the schemes can be found in Appendix 3.

Table 11.4: Joint Transport Study required schemes

Timescale
Ref Mode Connectivity Scheme Cost S M L
Local Plan schemes
LP1 Within WoE Yate and Coalpit • A432 metrobus, walking and cycling High
Heath • Yate railway station improvements
• Winterbourne and Frampton Cotterell Bypass
• Local highway improvements
• Coalpit Heath and Westerleigh Bypass
LP2 Within WoE Nailsea and Backwell • Nailsea sustainable travel, rail station and High
local network improvements
• Nailsea – Backwell A370
• Clevedon – Nailsea – Bristol Transport
Corridor Improvements
LP3 Within WoE Thornbury, Buckover • A38 metrobus, walking and cycling High
and Charfield • Charfield Station
• M5 J14
• Local highway improvements
LP4 Within WoE Bristol Urban Area • Bristol City Centre Framework High
• Local bus package (GBBN2)
• Bristol walking and cycling package
• M32 Park & Ride
• A38(S)/A4174 Park & Ride
• A4018 Park & Ride
• A4 Portway and A370 Long Ashton Park & Ride
expansion
LP5 Within WoE Weston-super- • Weston-super-Mare metrobus
Mare • Weston-super-Mare Park & Ride
• Local bus, walking and cycling improvements
• Local highway and junction improvements
LP6 Within WoE Churchill • Local highway improvements
• Local sustainable travel package

LP7 Local Banwell • Sustainable travel package

134
March 2020

Other longer-term opportunities with other new aspirational schemes, are shown
To assist in delivering the JLTP4 strategy we have in Table 11.5 below. The total cost of delivering
also identified a set of aspirational schemes for our aspirational schemes is currently estimated as
consideration in the longer-term. These, subject £0.5bn-£1bn.
to review during the lifetime of the JLTP4 along

Table 11.5: Other longer-term opportunities
Timescale
Ref Mode Connectivity Scheme Cost S M L
L1 Freight Beyond WoE Strategic Rail and Road Freight Package High
L2 Highway Within WoE A46 to M4 route improvements, Cold Ashton Low
L3 Public Transport Within WoE Bath Area Bus Network Improvement Scheme Med
(BABNIS)
L4 Public Transport Within WoE Henbury Loop rail services Med
L5 Public Transport Within WoE Rail services to Thornbury Med
L6 Multimodal Within WoE M5 Junction 20 Local Highway Improvements Med

135
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 11:
Major schemes and summary of interventions continued

Working with partners to build our The schemes in Table 6 and other schemes
(including those shared strategic priorities that are
current programme yet to be defined) will also be developed, where
There are a number of schemes outlined above relevant, through working with neighbouring
that affect the motorway and major road network authorities and those further afield, through the
including new and improved motorway junctions, South West Peninsula and/or the Western Gateway
and other improved strategic highway links. Sub-National Transport Body.
Moreover, there are packages of rail network
improvements including additional capacity and Summary of interventions
services, new stations and upgraded junctions,
benefitting freight and passengers. The following is a summary of interventions by
level of connectivity; further details of these,
These schemes would be partly or fully funded and including the actions, are set out in sections 6 to 9.
delivered by Highways England and Network Rail.
Those schemes that will be delivered in partnership Beyond West of England
with these bodies are identified in Table 6. l Work with Bristol Airport to maximise the

Table 6: Schemes to be developed in partnership airport’s transport connectivity as a local, sub-
with Highways England and Network Rail regional and regional transport interchange
l Enable improved transport connectivity with
Highways England Bristol Port
South coast to M4 connectivity improvements
l Maximise opportunities arising from
M4 Junction 18a to A4174 Ring Road
improvements to the strategic road and rail
M5 Junction 14 network, and identify and support delivery of
M5 Junction 19 further changes
M5 Junction 19 & Junction 20 improved links for l Identify opportunities to manage the impact of
Nailsea/Backwell Severn Bridge tolls removal
M5 J21a and A38 corridor
l Support the role of coaches for residents and
M32 Park & Ride
visitors
Smart Motorways M4 J18 to 19
Network Rail
l Manage and mitigate the impact of regular and
infrequent events on the transport network
Charfield station reopening
Keynsham and Yate railway station improvements Within West of England
MetroWest phase 1 l Provide high quality and reliable mass and rapid

MetroWest phase 2 transit
Nailsea and Backwell railway station l Support and enhance existing public transport
improvements services
Passenger rail services and capacity l Improve the availability and accessibility of
improvements, station upgrades and new stations accurate travel information and ticketing
package

136
March 2020

l Provide Park & Ride and sharing schemes l Support travel planning with developers,
to minimise the impact of single occupancy education providers and individuals
vehicles
l Support travel planning with businesses and
l Recognise the needs of motorcycle and moped employment sites
users
l Encourage mode shift through grants, incentives
l Use technology to keep traffic moving and rewards
l Embrace technology to improve cleaner travel l Maximise awareness of sustainable and active
options travel choices and the benefits these bring
l Use, as appropriate, measures and technological l Support those without a private car, who need to
advances to influence and better manage the travel, in accessing the services they require
demand of private car use
l Promote the role of technology in accessing
l Define, manage and maintain the Key Route services and employment
Network
l Support the role of taxis and private hire
l Develop and improve network resilience vehicles
through an ongoing commitment to highway
maintenance
l Support the role of demand responsive and
community transport
l Effectively manage the Major Road Network
l Support ongoing work to manage the impact of
l Effectively accommodate development sites and transport on air quality and climate change
associated trips
l Support ongoing work on Clean Air Zones and
l Support the delivery of Enterprise Zones/ the UK Air Quality Plan
business clustering
l Support work on zero and low emission vehicles
l Balance the requirement for distributing goods,
with mitigating the adverse impact of vehicles Neighbourhood Connectivity
l Improve the quality of streets and public realm
Local Connectivity
l Provide an attractive, safe and usable walking
l Prioritise walking, cycling and public transport
and cycling network into new developments

l Provide schemes to support the uptake of
l Provide clear wayfinding and signage
cycling l Improve and maintain Public Rights of Way
l Consider the needs of all road users in the l Work with residents and communities to identify
design of transport and highway schemes, barriers to accessibility
particularly vulnerable road users
l Support the provision of safe crossings and
l Deliver road safety education, skills and training speed reduction in appropriate locations
to equip people with the knowledge and skills to
travel in a safe and sustainable way l Improve actual and perceived personal security
l Work in partnership to build safer communities

137
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 11:
Major schemes and summary of interventions continued

138
March 2020

Section 12:
Targets, indicators, monitoring
Background Monitoring indicators
Targets and indicators play an important role in It is important to have a robust, reliable and
JLTP4. They are designed to measure and monitor affordable method of monitoring progress against
our progress towards achieving JLTP4’s objectives, the indicators. This helps ensure comparability,
highlight where we are doing well and identify transparency and crucially at a cost that local
where we need to improve. Indicators need to authorities can sustain; particularly in the context
strike the balance between being challenging but of significant budget cuts and an increasing strain
achievable; comprehensive but also practical to on the already stretched local authority resources.
collect, analyse and report.
Robust monitoring procedures building on those
Our targets, indicators and monitoring cover the established in JLTP3 will be put in place, informed
most ambitious transport programme the West of by using set baseline data. To make the most use
England has seen. They will reflect local priorities of existing data and limited resources several of
as identified in our key policy documents, such as the indicators for example congestion and modal
our Core Strategies and Corporate Plans, covering share will be used to monitor more than one of
the climate emergency and carbon reduction, air the five JLTP4 objectives. An annual monitoring
quality, sustainable economic growth, health and report against the targets and indicators will be
well-being, housing and social inclusion. published. A mid-term review will assess the
suitability of the targets and based on performance
Developing indicators some may be adjusted accordingly. This will
set more appropriate targets for the remaining
Our range of JLTP4 indicators and how they will monitoring periods.
monitor progress against the five key objectives is
set out in Table 12.1.

Table 12.1: Indicators against JLTP4 Objectives
3 = direct impact l = indirect impact

Indicators Climate change Sustainable Equality & Health, Better places
& air quality & inclusive accessibility wellbeing,
economic safety &
growth security
Road congestion 3 3 3 3
Bus satisfaction 3 l l

Air quality 3 l l 3
Carbon emissions 3 l l 3
Electric Vehicles 3 l l 3
Road Safety l 3 l
Modal share 3 3 3 3 3

139
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 12:
Targets, indicators, monitoring continued

Modal shift target The monitoring periods and mid-term review points
for the Plan period 2020 - 2036, assuming the plan
The JTS set out how modal share is forecast is adopted in 2020, are:
to change by 2036 if all of the transport vision
schemes were implemented. This is shown below l 1st Monitoring period mid-term review: 2022
and forms the JLTP4’s initial modal share target. l End of Monitoring period 1 review: 2024
Car commuting is forecast to reduce from 59%
to 45% (single occupancy), against a backdrop of l 2nd Monitoring period mid-term review: 2027
forecast growth in housing and employment.
l End of Monitoring period 2 review: 2030
Early indications are that to become carbon neutral
by 2030 a substantially greater modal shift will be
l 3rd Monitoring period mid-term review: 2033
required. To achieve this is likely to require a shift l End of Monitoring period 3 review (and end of
in national Government policy, far higher take up plan period): 2036
rates for electric vehicles, further engine efficiency
improvements, carbon offsetting and potentially
some form of congestion charge alongside our
£9 billion programme of transport investment.
Technical work will be undertaken to refine the
level of modal shift and interventions required.

Work mainly at or from home
Walking and cycling
2036
2011 vision
Public transport
Other (e.g. m/c, taxi)
Car/van passenger
Car/van driver

529,000 trips 673,000 trips

140
March 2020

Risks associated with meeting targets l Rise of CAVs and automated technology and
uncertainty over timescales of technology
There are a number of risks that could hinder our brought in and how this affects travel choices
progress towards achieving the targets, so we
need ways to avoid or soften them. The main risks l Impact of Clean Air Zones on travel choices
are those outside the direct control of the local The risks will be managed within the monitoring
authorities, but there are also internal risks that periods and will be identified and reviewed at the
can be influenced by the authorities. mid-term review point.
Possible risks include:
l Reduced funding affecting the ability of Summary of indicators
authorities to meet targets Listed in the table below are the targets, indicators
l Escalating costs reducing the number of and monitoring methods to achieve each JLTP4
deliverable schemes within budget constraints objective and outcome. The seven indicators, with
accompanying targets, are summarised below and
l Bus and rail fares increasing faster than the cost are ordered according to when they appear in Table
of using the private car 12.2, and not on priority or importance. The targets
are to be achieved by the end of each monitoring
l Increasing cost of bus service provision limiting period unless specified otherwise.
the expansion of services/frequencies
l A lack of investment in rail
l Major transport schemes delayed or not
implemented
l Annual figures fluctuating due to small figures
(in absolute terms), for example the number
of children killed and seriously injured in road
collisions
l A breakdown in the supply of data or cooperation
with private sector or government departments
causing a reduction or end to providing
publicly available data, for example the DfT for
congestion data
l Housing completion and employment provision
rates fluctuating outside of local authority
control
l Change in central Government policy shifting
emphasis towards or away from areas monitored
by in JLTP4, for example Government funding for
road space reallocation schemes for cycle/bus
provision

141
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 12:
Targets, indicators, monitoring continued

Table 12.2:
Targets & Monitoring: Indicators and Targets against JLTP4 Objectives
Objective: Take action against climate changes and address poor air quality

Outcome Indicators Monitoring Methods/ Targets
Datasets
NOx, particulates and Air quality UA annual monitoring Ensure levels of NO2 across
carbon emissions are (statutory) across designated air all of the WoE monitoring sites
reduced quality sites, update are below the annual mean air
reports annually quality objective of 40µg/m3
Target: NO2 levels at all WoE
monitoring sites are below the
annual mean air quality objective
of 40 µg/m3
CO2 levels UK local authority and Transport in the West of England
regional CO2 emissions to be carbon neutral by 2030
national statistics (A roads,
minor roads and transport
other)
Technological advances Electric Vehicle DfT Vehicle Licencing data 5000 registrations per year from
to improve air quality and uptake – quarterly / annual data 2020 in the West of England
monitoring are embraced releases on ULEV uptake; Ensuring 100% of new homes
Go Ultra Low project will (where applicable) have a charge
also collect data on EV point available.
take-up and EV charging
infrastructure

142
March 2020

Table 12.2 continued:
Targets & Monitoring: Indicators and Targets against JLTP4 Objectives
Objective: Support sustainable and inclusive economic growth

Outcome Indicators Monitoring Methods/ Targets
Datasets
Improved efficiency and Road congestion Average AM peak journey To achieve green (0-5% decrease)
reliability on local, national time on identified key or amber (0-5% increase) in
and international transport corridors. average AM peak journey time
networks DfT data on average delay on A roads managed by the
on locally managed A local authorities across each
roads by local authority monitoring period
Table CGN0502b
Access opportunities to Road congestion Average AM peak journey To achieve green (0-5% decrease)
employment growth areas time on identified key or amber (0-5% increase) in
and education is provided corridors (on routes to EAs average AM peak journey time
for all and urban centres) on A roads managed by the
DfT data on average delay local authorities across each
on locally managed A monitoring period
roads by local authority
Table CGN0502b
Modal share Household surveys Use of JTS forecast modal share
to 2036 - see Modal Shift Target
section

143
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 12:
Targets, indicators, monitoring continued

Table 12.2 continued:
Targets & Monitoring: Indicators and Targets against JLTP4 Objectives
Objective: Enable equality and improve accessibility

Outcome Indicators Monitoring Methods/ Targets
Datasets
Increased use of Modal share Household surveys Use of JTS forecast modal share
sustainable transport. to 2036 - see Modal Shift Target
Access opportunities to section.
employment and growth
areas and education is
provided for all
Improved efficiency and Road congestion Average AM peak journey To achieve green (0-5% decrease)
reliability on local. national time on identified key or amber (0-5% increase) in
and international transport corridors. average AM peak journey time
networks DfT data on average delay on A roads managed by the
on locally managed A local authorities across each
roads by local authority monitoring period
Increased use of Bus satisfaction Transport Focus annual To increase overall levels of
sustainable transport survey passenger satisfaction in the
overall journey from a base of
85% (2018) to 95% (2036)

144
March 2020

Table 12.2 continued:
Targets & Monitoring: Indicators and Targets against JLTP4 Objectives
Objective: Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety and security

Outcome Indicators Monitoring Methods/ Targets
Datasets
Access opportunities to Modal share Household surveys Use of JTS forecast modal share
employment and growth to 2036 - see Modal Shift Target
areas and education is section.
provided for all
There is a continued Road Safety Highways Road Safety A vision of zero avoidable deaths
reduction in the number (statutory) statutory reporting on on locally managed roads by
of road casualties on the Killed or Seriously Injured 2036.
transport network (KSI) Not more than 160 KSI incidents
per year by 2025.
0 KSI incidents per year by 2036.
Road safety for transport Road Safety Road safety reporting – Target: retain proportion of
users is improved, (statutory) rates of collisions and KSIs casualties for ‘Vulnerable Road
particularly for those most by mode of transport Users’ (motorcyclists, cyclists &
at risk pedestrians);
Target: retain proportion in rate
of child and 65+ casualties as %
of all users
Personal safety on the Safety & Security on Transport Focus Bus 20% increase in passenger
transport network is Public Transport Survey satisfaction with personal safety
improved, and there is less on buses and waiting at stops
crime and fear of crime

145
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 12:
Targets, indicators, monitoring continued

Table 12.2 continued:
Targets & Monitoring: Indicators and Targets against JLTP4 Objectives
Objective: Create better places

Outcome Indicators Monitoring Methods/ Targets
Datasets
Access opportunities to Modal share Household surveys Use of JTS forecast modal share
employment and growth to 2036 - see Modal Shift Target
areas and education is section.
provided for all
There is a continued Road Safety Highways Road Safety A vision of zero avoidable deaths
reduction in the number (statutory) statutory reporting on on locally managed roads by
of road casualties on the Killed or Seriously Injured 2036.
transport network (KSI) Not more than 160 KSI incidents
per year by 2025.
0 KSI incidents per year by 2036.
Road safety for transport Road Safety Road safety reporting – Target: retain proportion of
users is improved, (statutory) rates of collisions and KSIs casualties for ‘Vulnerable Road
particularly for those most by mode of transport Users’ (motorcyclists, cyclists &
at risk pedestrians);
Target: retain proportion in rate
of child and 65+ casualties as %
of all users
Personal safety on the Safety & Security on Transport Focus Bus 20% increase in passenger
transport network is Public Transport Survey satisfaction with personal safety
improved, and there is less on buses and waiting at stops
crime and fear of crime

146
March 2020

Section 13:
Environmental, equalities and health
impact assessments of JLTP4
Introduction Strategic Environmental Assessment
The European Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) summary
(SEA) Directive (2001/42/EC) requires an The SEA process is undertaken in five key stages
environmental assessment to be undertaken of any which are:
plans or policies that could result in an impact on
the environment. The overall aim of the SEA process
l Stage A – Scoping: Setting the context and
is to ensure better protection for the environment, objectives, establishing the baseline and
population and human health by making decision- deciding on the scope;
makers aware (at an early stage of the JLTP4 l Stage B – Environmental Assessment:
development) the likely effects of the plan on the Developing and refining alternatives and
environment and by seeking to introduce measures assessing effects;
that can be undertaken either to avoid adverse l Stage C – Reporting: Preparing the SEA
effects or to help improve the environment. Environmental Report;
The SEA does not provide a detailed assessment l Stage D – Consultation: Consulting on the draft
of the schemes listed within JLTP4 but includes programme and the SEA Environmental Report;
a broad assessment of the likely effects of the and
schemes as well as the overall plan.
l Stage E – Monitoring: Monitor the significant
As part of the SEA process, an Environmental Report effects of implementing the plan or programme
has been prepared for JLTP4. This provides an on the environment.
assessment of “the likely significant effects on the
environment”. The Environmental Report includes a Environmental baseline
Habitats Regulations Assessment, Equalities Impact The SEA Directive and associated UK Regulations
Assessment and Health Impact Assessment, as well state that the SEA must consider the following
as an assessment of how the JLTP4 option performs topic areas:
against alternatives; in this case the alternative
options are determined to be ‘Retention of JLTP3’
l Biodiversity;
and ‘Without Plan’ scenarios. l Population;
The SEA takes into account the requirements of l Human health;
the Paris Agreement through including climatic l Flora and Fauna;
factors as one of the environmental baseline topic
areas. Alongside this are the two SEA objectives
l Soil;
to ‘Reduce transport related carbon emissions l Water;
in line with national targets’ (SEAO3) and ‘Adapt l Air;
transport network to effects of climate change and
minimise the vulnerability of transport network to l Climatic factors;
flood risk’ (SEAO4). For SEA03 the SEA noted that l Material assets;
numerous policies within the JLTP4 will have a
minor or potential major positive effect whilst for
l Cultural heritage, including archaeological and
SEAO4 strategic and major transport infrastructure architectural heritage;
schemes will have to be designed to take into the l Landscape; and
effects of climate change in line with national policy l The interrelationship between these factors.
and best practice design.

147
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 13:
Environmental, equalities and health impact assessments of JLTP4 continued

SEA Objectives and key findings l SEAO8: Minimise adverse effects on soils such
The Scoping Stage, which included statutory as loss, compaction, erosion and pollution from
consultation with Natural England, Historic England transport-related activities’
and the Environment Agency, provided the baseline l SEAO9: ‘Protect, and where possible improve,
information on the topics listed above and identified water quality’
the SEA Objectives listed below. SEA Objectives are
a way of strategically assessing whether the JLTP4 l SEAO10: ‘Minimise waste produced and
has an effect on environmental and social aspects. resources consumed by transport infrastructure
and operation of transport services’
The policies and interventions (interventions
comprise activities and new schemes) within JLTP4 l SEAO11: Protect and enhance the rich diversity
were assessed against the SEA Objectives. The key of the historical and cultural environment, its
findings of this assessment in terms of potential heritage assets and their setting’
significant effects are summarised at Table 1 of
l SEAO12: Maintain and enhance the quality
Appendix 1: Summary of Environmental Report.
and character of the built environment and
The SEA Regulations require that mitigation landscape’
measures are considered to prevent, reduce
As outlined above, the potential significant effects
or offset any significant adverse effects on the
and proposed mitigations against these are
environment of implementing the plan. The
outlined in Table 1 of Appendix 1: Summary of
measures are known as ‘mitigation’ measures.
Environmental Report.
Table 1 also sets out the key mitigation measures
proposed for adverse and uncertain impacts. Generally, the certainty of the assessment has
been assessed as being low to medium. The main
The SEA Objectives (SEAO) are listed below:
reasons for this are listed below:
l SEAO 1: ‘Improve accessibility for a growing and
l Despite the strong commitment to shift journeys
ageing population’
into cleaner and more sustainable transport
l SEAO 2: Reduce transport related air pollution’ modes, there are various degrees of uncertainty
with regards to planned actions, programme
l SEAO 3: ‘Reduce transport related carbon and funding of some of the interventions;
emissions in line with national targets’
l There is uncertainty regarding whether
l SEAO 4: ‘Adapt transport network to effects of improvements to the public transport system
climate change and minimise the vulnerability of from the major schemes would be sufficient
transport network to flood risk’ to counteract traffic growth and associated
l SEAO 5: ‘Protect and enhance biodiversity and adverse environmental effects. The implications
ecological networks’ of removal of the Severn Crossing Toll could be
significant are still being assessed;
l SEAO6: ‘Promote human health’
l Advanced technologies are currently in early
l SEAO7: Improve road safety, particularly for development stages;
vulnerable users, and to reduce road casualties’
l Uncertainty regarding the rate of climate change
and the degree to which it will alter weather
patterns in the medium and longer term;

148
March 2020

l Information from the Habitats Regulations authorities have been assessed as being beneficial.
Assessment is required to better understand A combination of both adverse and beneficial
potential adverse effects on European effects is expected as a result of the JLTP4 in
designated sites; combination with the West of England’s Adopted
l Effects are likely to be both variable across the Joint Waste Core Strategy 2011 and the local
region and dependent upon proximity of the transport plans of the neighbouring authorities.
sensitive receptors to the road network; Scheme design and the relevant consenting
processes will provide opportunities to mitigate
l There are also uncertainties about route adverse effects and promote enhancements.
alignments as well as specific design details
such as use of material and sitting; and Alternatives to JLTP4
The SEA also considers the impact of adopting
l The combined effect of the predicted growth
and implementing JLTP4 compared to the likely
in the region with the various transport
impact of any reasonable alternative scenarios.
infrastructure schemes that may go ahead
The likely impacts of the plan and the reasonable
are likely to adversely affect biodiversity,
alternatives are identified, described and evaluated.
soils and potentially water quality. This is also
The reasonable alternative scenarios considered as
the case for potential effects on cultural and
part of this JLTP4 assessment, are:
built environment. Mitigation / enhancement
measures included as part of the design and l JLTP4 Scenario: this situation considers the
implementation of the specific schemes may development and eventual adoption of the
offset some of the adverse effects. policies contained in the JLTP4;

Cumulative effects l Retention of JLTP3 - This scenario represents
The SEA Regulations require that cumulative a continuation of existing policies planning
effects are considered when identifying likely principles and policies outlined in the JLTP3
significant effects. The type of development document, with the accompanying Major
involved in both JLTP4 and regional and local Schemes programme and priorities packages
growth ambitions will result in similar types of with the plan period being extended to cover the
effects and in some locations they will affect period up until 2036;
the same environmental and other assets. l The “Without Plan” scenario - This scenario
Cumulative effects are therefore expected from the assumes that the JLTP3 is completed with
implementation of these two plans. A coordinated no replacement LTP in place, so no transport
and supportive approach to mitigation and planning principles, policies or interventions
enhancement between the plans will assist with would be in place.
minimising the likelihood and scale of adverse
effects and maximising potential benefits. The Generally, the Retention of JLTP3 and JLTP4
development and implementation of the West perform equally in SEA Objectives 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 9 and
of England’s Green Infrastructure Strategy has 12. JLTP4 performs better against SEA Objectives
been identified as the environmental strategic 3 and 6, whilst Continuation of JLTP3 performs
framework to facilitate this. better against SEA Objectives 5, 10 and 11. The
“Without Plan” performs worst against all the SEA
The cumulative effect between the JLTP4 and objectives.
the Local Air Quality Strategies of the West
of England’s and those of the neighbouring

149
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 13:
Environmental, equalities and health impact assessments of JLTP4 continued

Habitats Regulations Assessment An HRA should determine whether a plan would
adversely affect the integrity of a European site in
(HRA) summary terms of its nature conservation objectives. Where
As outlined above, a Habitats Regulations negative effects are identified, other options should
Assessment (HRA) was required to be undertaken be examined to avoid any potential for damaging
on the JLTP4 major transport schemes that were effects.
assessed to have a Likely Significant Effect (LSE)
‘Screening’ is the first stage in HRA. If Likely
on one of the identified Natura 2000 network
Significant Effects (LSEs) on European sites are
(or ‘European Sites’). ‘European Sites’ are:
identified in screening, measures must be put in
candidate Special Areas of Conservation (cSACs),
place to avoid them. Further investigation may be
Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) and Sites
necessary to understand how a plan might affect
of Community Importance (SCIs); and Special
the integrity of European sites i.e. Appropriate
Protection Areas (SPAs). The National Planning
Assessment and to develop effective avoidance
Policy Framework also requires proposed SPAs,
and mitigation measures (or consider mitigation
possible SACs, listed or proposed Ramsar sites,
measures already proposed in relation to schemes
and sites required to provide compensatory
and projects).
measures to be treated as European sites in
England. The following European sites have been considered
in the HRA of the WoE JLTP4:
Summaries of the HRA Screening Stage and
the following HRA Appropriate Assessment are l Avon Gorge Woodlands SAC;
provided below. More information is included in
the full assessments, which are published on the l Bath and Bradford-on-Avon Bats SAC;
JLTP4 section of the travelwest website. l Chew Valley Lake SPA;
HRA screening stage summary l Mells Valley SAC;
Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) is required l Mendip Limestone Grasslands SAC;
of JLTP4 in accordance with Article 6 (3) of the
EU Habitats Directive1 as transposed into the UK l Mendip Woodlands SAC;
law by the Conservation of Habitats and Species
Regulations 2017 (‘the Habitats Regulations’). l North Somerset & Mendip Bats SAC;
Habitats Regulations requires an assessment l River Usk / Afon Wysg SAC;
(referred to as a HRA) to be undertaken in respect
of any plan or project which either alone or in l River Wye SAC;
combination with other plans or projects would l Rodborough Common SAC;
be likely to have a significant effect on a site
designated within the Natura 2000 network (or l Salisbury Plain SAC and SPA;
European sites) and is not directly connected with,
or necessary to, the management of the site. In l Severn Estuary SAC, SPA and Ramsar;
2009, the Department of Transport also issued l Somerset Levels and Moor SPA and Ramsar;
guidance that local transport authorities need to
consider if their Local Transport Plan is likely to l Wye Valley and Forest of Dean Bats SAC; and
have a significant effect on a European site.
l Wye Valley Woodlands SAC.

150
March 2020

Apart from ‘softer’ actions which will occur as a Some uncertainty has also been identified in
result of the JLTP4, such as improving information relation to some schemes for which insufficient
provision and road safety training, it is the major details are available at this stage to allow
schemes set out within the plan which will screening.
physically deliver the JLTP4 with regards to, for
example, infrastructure development and changes As LSEs and uncertainty have been identified in the
to traffic. HRA screening has therefore focussed on screening stage, the HRA had to progress to the
the major schemes in order to identify the potential second stage (appropriate assessment) in which
LSEs on European sites resulting from the JLTP4. the potential effects and uncertainty identified in
screening was to be considered in more detail,
A Geographical Information System (GIS) has been including any mitigation already proposed and
used along with expert judgement to screen the identifying additional mitigation if necessary.
major schemes for potential LSEs.
It was envisaged that the appropriate assessment
Screening has identified whether: would need to consider the following potential
effects:
a) The scheme is not likely to have a significant
effect on a European site - no LSE identified; l Loss of foraging areas or severance of flyways
used by bats;
b) The scheme is likely to have a significant
effect on a European site either alone or in- l Increase in recreational pressures;
combination with other plans and projects - LSE
identified; or
l Spread of diseases;

c) It is not possible to rule out the risk of
l Spread of invasive species;
significant effects on a European site, either l Water pollution;
alone or in-combination with other plans and
projects – LSE identified. l Marine litter;

The findings of the screening stage have identified l Loss of habitats for birds;
LSEs in relation to the following sites: l Physical modification of watercourses; and
l Avon Gorge Woodlands SAC; l Coastal squeeze effects.
l Bath and Bradford-on- Avon Bats SAC;
The appropriate assessment would need to reflect
l Chew Valley Lake SPA; the strategic nature of the JLTP4 and would make
reference to the appropriate assessment of the
l Mendip Limestone Grasslands SAC; previous regional growth plan – the Joint Spatial
l Mendip Woodlands SAC; Plan. The JLTP4 appropriate assessment work will
commence as soon as possible after consultation
l North Somerset and Mendip Bats SAC; on the screening findings with Natural England.
l Severn Estuary SAC, SPA and Ramsar; and
l River Wye / Afon Gwy SAC.

151
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 13:
Environmental, equalities and health impact assessments of JLTP4 continued

HRA Appropriate Assessment: summary Suggested mechanisms for potential effects to
The Appropriate Assessment of the WoE JLTP4 has be mitigated and environmental benefits to be
considered whether adverse effects or uncertain incorporated into scheme delivery have been
effects on European sites could result, both from put forward in order to avoid the risk of adverse
the JLTP4 alone and in combination with the WoE’s effects occurring on all European sites. The HRA is
previous regional growth plan, the Joint Spatial strategic in nature, acknowledging that there is a
Plan, as well as other plans and projects in or near need for further detailed, specific assessments of
to the plan area. The assessment has taken into impacts and mitigation requirements at the local
consideration mitigation measures put forward level (through the preparation of new Local Plans
within the Appropriate Assessment of the then WoE and their HRAs and the development consent
Joint Spatial Plan. An Appropriate Assessment of process).
the new regional growth plan will be worked on However, the MetroWest Phase 1 scheme would
alongside this (JLTP4) Appropriate Assessment in result in the direct loss of up to 0.71ha of woodland
due course. within the Avon Gorge Woodland SAC and therefore
Several European sites could be affected by a an adverse effect on this SAC remains following
number of different transport schemes as follows: mitigation. No feasible alternatives to this scheme
have been identified. It is therefore necessary
l The Avon Gorge Woodlands SAC could be for this scheme to proceed to the ‘IROPI test’
affected by the direct loss of habitat as a result (Imperative Reason of Overriding Public Interest).
of the MetroWest Phase 1 scheme; If the UK is still subject to the Habitats Directive at
the time the application for the MetroWest Phase 1
l The North Somerset and Mendip Bats SAC could
is determined (expected to be 2021) then consent
potentially be affected by a number of different
may be granted following consultation between the
schemes and the adverse effects could relate
Government and the European Commission. If the
to fragmentation of bat commuting corridors
UK is no longer subject to the Habitats Directive
and loss of bat foraging areas and recreational
then it is expected that the decision would be made
pressure;
by the Secretary of State. Compensation measures,
l The Bath and Bradford Bats SAC could similarly included planting of additional woodland, would be
be affected by a number of schemes in relation provided if the IROPI test is passed. At this stage,
to fragmentation of bat commuting corridors it is therefore not possible to conclude no adverse
and loss of bat foraging areas; effect on the integrity of the Avon Gorge Woodland
SAC as a result of
l The Mendip Limestone Grasslands SAC
could be affected by a number of cycle route MetroWest Phase 1
schemes and adverse effects could result from With the exception of the MetroWest Phase 1
recreational pressure; and scheme, provided that the mitigation measures
l The Severn Estuary SAC, SPA and Ramsar site identified within Chapters 5 to 12 of the full HRA
could potentially be affected by a number of Appropriate Assessment report are incorporated
schemes and adverse effects could result from within the JLTP4, it should otherwise be possible to
loss of habitats used by birds, recreational conclude that the JLTP4 will not have an adverse
pressure, water pollution and physical effect on the integrity of all other European sites,
medication of watercourses impeding migration either alone or in combination with other plans and
of fish. projects. The assessment can be found in full on
the JLTP4 section of the travelwest website.

152
March 2020

The next step is for the recommended mitigation region. Some of the most vulnerable groups will
within the report to be responded to and changes particularly benefit, specifically:
made to the JLTP4 by the West of England
JLTP4 working group. Once mitigation has been
l People with limited or no access to cars;
incorporated within the JLTP4 it will then be l People with respiratory illnesses, and those
possible to conclude the Appropriate Assessment of more susceptible to poor air quality (children
the JLTP4 except the MetroWest Phase 1 scheme. and young people and older people); and
The final conclusion of the JLTP4 Appropriate
Assessment would be reached in 2021 once a l People that require access to employment,
decision has been made on MetroWest Phase 1. education, health and/ or other services.

Mitigation Requirements Although positive, the Equality Impact Assessment
concluded that there still possible adverse impacts
A series of mitigations requirements have that would be felt by people who are reliant on
been identified by the JLTP4 HRA Appropriate the use of a car (such as people with a disability),
Assessment and as a result have been added particularly if charging is introduced, or those with
to the plan to strengthen it. A summary of all limited mobility who are unable to participate in
mitigations can be found at Table 14.1 in the active travel (such as older people of people with a
final HRA Appropriate Assessment Report on disability).
the JLTP4 section of the travelwest website.
The resulting updates to the plan, including all The full Equalities Impact Assessment can be found
comments from the consultation period regarding at Appendix C of the JLTP4 Environmental report
the environmental effects of the plan, will also be on the travelwest website (https://travelwest.info/
published on the JLTP4 section of the travelwest projects/joint-local-transport-plan).
website in Spring 2020 as part of the SEA
Statement.
Health Impact Assessment (HIA)
summary
Equalities Impact Assessment (EqIA)
summary Health Impact Assessment is a systematic
approach to identifying the differential health and
Equality Impact Assessment considers the impact wellbeing impacts, both positive and negative, of
of a project or policy on persons or groups of projects and plans.
persons who share characteristics which are
protected under section 4 of the Equality Act 2010 The single greatest potential health outcome of the
(“protected characteristics”) and might also include draft Joint Local Transport Plan has been assessed
others considered to be vulnerable within society as the indirect health benefits from improved
such as low-income groups. It is an information access to, and accessibility of, transport options.
gathering tool which enables decision makers These benefits have been assessed as being of
within public bodies to implement their equality long-term, permanent, major benefit for all groups.
duty under the Equality Act 2010. The Equality In addition, the proposed development has been
Impact Assessment concluded that the JLTP4 assessed as providing indirect health benefits as
should have a positive impact on the general public a consequence of improving air quality in urban
that are living, working or visiting the West of areas, encouraging greater physical activity
England by providing a safer, resilient, sustainable through active travel, and providing economic and
and convenient transport opportunities for the employment benefits in the region.

153
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Section 13:
Environmental, equalities and health impact assessments of JLTP4 continued

In contrast to the beneficial impacts above, Monitoring and next steps
the draft Joint Local Plan has been assessed
as potentially contributing to adverse health The SEA Regulations require that monitoring is
outcomes as a consequence of potential noise undertaken on a plan so that the significant effects
impacts. Potential moderate adverse health of implementation can be identified and remedial
outcomes were predicted as a result of an unlikely action imposed. A monitoring framework for the
reduction in traffic on transport networks despite SEA has been developed following consultation
improvements to the road networks and public on this SEA. A number of indicators have been
transport provisions in the region. These potential identified as relevant to the potential impacts of
adverse effects would be scheme and location the JLTP4 on the SEA objectives and are included
specific and the implementation of mitigation within the JLTP4 monitoring framework. Details
measures associated with Policy N1 and / or the of this monitoring framework will be included in
Environmental Impact Assessment process (where the SEA Statement, which will be available on the
relevant) are likely to reduce their impact. These JLTP4 section of the travelwest website in Spring
adverse health effects associated with noise are 2020.
considered temporary, as improvements might be
Given the links between JLTP4 and residential
made through technological development.
& employment growth planning in the West of
The full Health Impact Assessment can be found England, a coordinated approach to monitoring
at Appendix D of the JLTP4 Environmental report both plans will be explored.
on the travelwest website (https://travelwest.info/
projects/joint-local-transport-plan).

SEA consultation
The SEA Environmental Report was made available
for consultation and public comment at the same
time as the draft plan or programme back in
February & March 2019, as an integral part of
the consultation process. The SEA Environmental
Report and a separate Non-Technical Summary is
still available on the travelwest website https://
travelwest.info.

154
March 2020

Glossary
Active travel Carbon footprint
Using your own power to travel, such as cycling The total greenhouse gas emissions caused
and walking. It also includes walking or cycling directly and indirectly by an individual,
as part of a longer journey. Active travel helps to organisation, event or product, expressed as a
increase physical activity levels which has a range carbon dioxide equivalent. See also: Carbon dioxide,
of health benefits and can play a role in reducing Greenhouse gas
congestion and air pollution.
City region
Air Quality Management Area (AQMA) The functional area around a city or large town.
Areas designated by local authorities where air
quality improvements are required to meet national Clean Air Zone (CAZ)
air quality objectives. Local authorities are required A defined area where measures are taken to
to produce an air quality action plan describing the improve air quality, deliver improved health
measures it will put in place to reduce pollution in benefits, whilst supporting economic growth.
the AQMA.
Climate change
Benchmarking The change in global climate patterns largely
The use of performance indicators and other attributed to increased levels of carbon dioxide
metrics to compare performance results against a produced by the burning of fossil fuels. See also:
reference point, especially between organisations Carbon dioxide
(and local authorities) with similar characteristics.
Climate Emergency
Business rates The recognition of scientific consensus that
A supplement levied by local government on climate change is a significant threat to humanity
non-domestic rate payers which is used to fund and represent a commitment to reduce or halt
additional investment to promote economic climate change to avoid potentially irreversible
development. environmental damage resulting from it. The
West of England Combined Authority and all of
Capital delivery the West of England authorities declared climate
Capital spending refers to major purchases spent emergencies in 2019.
on a physical asset or major physical infrastructure
or services, usually being built or bought from Combined authority
new. The life of this spending is beyond the current A combined authority is a legal structure
accounting period. Examples of capital spending that enables two or more local authorities to
could be on a new bus infrastructure, such as bus collaborate and make collective decisions across
lanes, as well as purchasing the buses, seen in council boundaries.
metrobus.
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)
Carbon dioxide (CO2) A tariff-based charge paid by developers to local
A gas produced and released into the atmosphere authorities to fund strategic infrastructure. CIL
when fossil fuels such as petrol and diesel are money does not need to be used to provide
burned. See also: Carbon Footprint, Climate change infrastructure on the same site it is collected from.
See also: Section 106

155
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Glossary continued

Connected and Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs) Heavy rail
Vehicles, also referred to as driverless cars, which A term for the conventional railway system to
incorporate a range of technologies allowing them distinguish it from light rail or tram systems.
to communicate with and draw information from
their environment to enable the safe, efficient Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS)
movement of people and goods. The use of information and communication
technologies applied to road transport,
Core cities infrastructure, vehicles and users to improve the
A network of eight major regional cities, including efficiency of transport across a range of situations.
Bristol, forming a strategic partnership to enhance
their economic performance and international Joint Spatial Plan (JSP)
competitiveness, with a particular focus on A statutory document which provides the strategic
transport and connectivity, climate change, and overarching framework to guide housing,
sustainability. employment and infrastructure over a defined
period within the combined authority area. See
Core Strategy also: Combined authority
A compulsory and key strategic document in a
Local Plan which includes: the evidence base Joint Transport Study (JTS)
for an area’s main social, physical and economic A report assessing current transport issues which
characteristics; its key strategic issues; and policies is used to inform high level strategy for the long-
to shape the development and use of land in that term development of a transport system over a
area. See also: Local Plan defined period in a combined authority area. See
also: Combined authority
Enterprise Zone/Enterprise Area
Areas across England that provide tax breaks and Key Route Network (KRN)
receive government support as part of a wider A defined network of highway routes that
government strategy to support business and contributes to economic growth by serving the
enable local economic growth. main flows of people, goods and services, and
provides connections to the national Strategic Road
Greenhouse gas Network. See also: Strategic Road Network and
A gas which absorbs solar radiation contributing Major Road Network
to the greenhouse effect which leads to global
warming and climate change. Light rail
A form of urban rail transport which operates
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) at a higher capacity to a tramway, often on an
An economic measure of the total value of all final exclusive right of way, and serving parts of a large
goods made and services provided within a country metropolitan area. See also: mass transit
during a specific time period.
Loading gauge
Gross Value Added (GVA) Refers to the size of freight wagons and containers
An economic measure of the value of goods and that can travel on a section of railway track.
services produced in an area, industry or sector. Network Rail uses a W loading gauge classification
system for freight ranging from W6A (smallest
wagons) through W7, W8, W9, W9Plus, W10, W11 to

156
March 2020

W12 (largest containers). The movement of freight Masterplan
by rail relies on there being a loading gauge large An overarching planning document which includes
enough to accommodate the wagons/containers. analysis and recommendations for a site or area’s
population, economic development, housing,
Local authority transportation and other land uses.
A local government organisation. In England there
may be either one or two tiers of local government. Mode shift
A two-tier structure includes a County Council as A percentage change in the use of different
the upper tier and a District Council as the transport modes. When one transport mode
becomes more advantageous than another over
lower tier. Local authority responsibilities include the same route or market, a modal shift is likely to
strategic land use planning, and highways and take place. The advantages of modal shift can be
transport. cost, convenience, speed or reliability.

Local Plan Multimodal
A statutory planning document which sets out the Combining different transport options, such as
vision and framework for future development cycling and rail, to form one single trip.
within a local planning authority area. It addresses Nitrogen dioxide (NO2)
housing, economy, community and infrastructure A gaseous pollutant caused by motor vehicles. See
and is used as a tool to guide decisions about also: NOX
development proposals. See also: Core Strategy
NOX
MaaS (Mobility as a Service)
A generic term for the nitrogen oxides that are
A shift away from privately owned vehicles towards most relevant for air pollution, namely nitric oxide
a model where different transport modes are (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2). NOX gases are
consumed as an on-demand service through a produced during the combustion of hydrocarbon
single (online) platform. For example, the concept fuels in diesel and petrol-powered vehicles. In
of paying for a weekly travel pass that includes areas of high motor vehicle traffic, NOX can be a
bike hire, car hire, bus and train travel. significant source of air pollution.
Major Road Network (MRN) Open data
The most strategic local routes in England, Data which anyone can access, use and share. For
commonly A roads, for which local (unitary) example, data obtained from journey planning tools
authorities are responsible. See also: Key Route and ticket sales can provide an understanding of
Network and Strategic Road Network travel behaviour and support the identification and
Mass transit development of measures that influence future
travel demand and mobility networks.
A form of public transport to satisfy higher
potential trip demand, featuring limited stops, high Private Hire Vehicle
capacity and attractive, reliable journey times. It is A vehicle with fewer than eight seats that is only
usually rail based, such as trams or light rail above allowed to carry passengers with pre-arranged
ground, or underground trains. bookings and is therefore different to taxis
(hackney carriages).

157
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Glossary continued

Rapid transit Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs)
Public transport on a high-quality bus-based Documents which expand upon and support Local
vehicle, with twin doors and ultra-low emissions, Plan policies with more detailed guidance. See
which is often segregated from general traffic also: Local Plan
through bus lanes or bus-only alignments. Offers
a significant increase in the quality and speed of Sustainable transport
public transport, including off-board ticketing. E.g. Forms of transport which have lower
metrobus environmental impact than single occupancy car
use. It includes walking, cycling, public transport,
Real Time Information Park & Ride, and car-sharing.
The use of vehicle location systems to
automatically update service information about Unitary authority (UA)
whether services are running to time. Passengers A type of local authority with a single tier
can access this information through web responsible for local government functions within
applications and at public transport stops. its area.

Section 106 (S106) Urban Living
A financial contribution made by developers to The principle of significantly increasing densities in
pay for the infrastructure necessary to make their urban areas to create compact urban areas where
development acceptable in planning terms. See people can live, work, socialise and easily access
also: Community Infrastructure Levy amenities, with good access to public transport.

Smart city West of England
An urban area which uses different types of The four local authority areas of Bath & North
electronic data collection sensors to supply East Somerset Council, Bristol City Council, North
information which can then be used to efficiently Somerset Council, and South Gloucestershire
manage assets and resources. This includes data Council.
collected from citizens, devices and assets and can
be applied to traffic, transport, and other systems. Ultra Low Emission Vehicle (ULEV)
Vehicles that use low carbon technologies, fuelled
Smart ticketing/Smartcard/travelwest card by electricity or hydrogen, to reduce the amount
An electronic form of pre-payment ticket for use of pollutants emitted. They commonly have
on buses and other forms of public transport with rechargeable batteries which are used to store
the possibility of also being used to pay for other energy
transport services. It is sometimes referred to as
an ‘electronic purse’.
Strategic Road Network (SRN)
The network of 4,300 miles of motorways and
major A-roads in England, which carries 30% of
all traffic and 60% of freight and business traffic.
It is managed by Highways England. See also: Key
Route Network and Major Road Network

158
March 2020

Appendix 1: Summary of
Environmental Report
West of England Joint Local Core to the delivery of the JLTP4 will be the Major
Schemes programme. The Major Schemes were
Transport Plan (JLTP4) Strategic grouped as follows:
Environmental Assessment (SEA) –
Key Findings (November 2018) l Transformational – including a mass transit
network
The councils making up the West of England are
currently updating their Joint Local Transport Plan l Mitigate Joint Spatial Plan growth – including
3 (JLTP3) into what is known as the “JLTP4”. The corridor scheme packages
objectives of JLTP4 are to: l Early investment schemes – including
l Support sustainable economic growth MetroWest

l Enable equality and improve accessibility l Schemes under development – studies funded
by the West of England
l Address poor air quality and take action against
climate change l Other long-term opportunities

l Contribute to better health, wellbeing, safety A Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) is
and security being prepared alongside the JLTP4. SEA is a
process required by law for certain types of plan
l Create better places or programme, such as a local transport plan. The
overall aim of the SEA process is to ensure better
The overall aim is to provide a well-connected
protection for the environment, population and
sustainable transport network that offers greater
human health by making decision-makers aware
realistic travel choices and makes walking, cycling
at an early stage of the likely significant effects
and public transport the natural way to travel.
of the plan on the environment and by seeking to
Policies and interventions under the new JLTP4 are
introduce measures that can be undertaken either
structured around improving connectivity at four
to avoid adverse effects or to help improve the
levels:
environment.
l Beyond the West of England – strategic road
In compliance with the Conservation of Habitats
and rail, port and airport
and Species Regulations 2017, an Appropriate
l Within the West of England – between the urban Assessment (AA) of JLTP4 is also being carried
areas, longer than 10km out. The first stage (screening) of the assessment
has identified a number of likely significant effects
l Local – up to 10km on European sites and therefore it is necessary to
l Neighbourhood – journeys within local advance to the full AA stage. Please refer to the
communities Habitats Regulations Screening Stage Summary
prepared by ClearLead for further information.
Central to this is the major schemes programme
based around the West of England’s Joint An Equalities Impact Assessment and a Health
Transport Study (JTS). The JTS was developed Impact Assessment of the JLTP4 have also been
as part of the supporting technical work to the undertaken and have informed the SEA process.
previous regional growth plan, West of England
Joint Spatial Plan (JSP).

159
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 1:
Summary of Environmental Report continued

The SEA process is undertaken in five key stages
which are:
l Stage A – Scoping: Setting the context and
objectives, establishing the baseline and
deciding on the
l Stage B – Environmental Assessment:
Developing and refining alternatives and
assessing effects
l Stage C – Reporting: Preparing the SEA
Environmental Report
l Stage D – Consultation: Consulting on the draft
programme and the SEA Environmental Report
l Stage E – Monitoring: Monitor the significant
effects of implementing the plan or programme
on the environment
The SEA Directive and associated UK Regulations
state that the SEA must consider the following
topic areas: Biodiversity; Population; Human
health; Flora and Fauna; Soil; Water; Air; Climatic
factors; Material assets; Cultural heritage,
including archaeological and architectural heritage;
Landscape; and the interrelationship between
these factors.
The Scoping Stage, which included statutory
consultation with Natural England, Historic
England and the Environment Agency1, provided
the baseline information on the topics listed above
and identified the SEA Objectives listed in Table 1.
The policies and interventions within JLTP4 were
assessed against the SEA Objectives. The key
findings of this assessment in terms of potential
significant effects and mitigation are summarised
in Table 1:

1 Consultation response from Environment Agency was still outstanding at the time of writing.

160
March 2020

Table 1 JLTP4 SEA Objectives, potential significant effects and mitigation
SEA OBJECTIVE POTENTIAL SIGNIFICANT EFFECTS MITIGATION
(SEAO)
SEAO 1: ‘Improve Most of the policies and interventions included There is a need to ensure that services and
accessibility for in the JLTP4 aim at improving accessibility employment or education opportunities are
a growing and which aligns with this SEA Objective resulting accessible by those with limited mobility.
aging population in likely long term major beneficial effects. Charging should not result in creating
a barrier to employment or education
opportunities, particularly for those who are
unemployed or on low income.
Strategic and major schemes will be delivered
through the appropriate consenting process
and will need to be subject to assessments
including health and equalities assessments.
Detailed mitigation and enhancement
opportunities will be developed as part of the
design and consenting process.
SEAO 2: Reduce Many of the policies and interventions within Public transport vehicles should be of high
transport related JLTP4 have the potential to reduce traffic modern standards to utilise alternative fuels
air pollution’ congestion and associated air pollution. Major where possible and minimise emissions.
long-term beneficial health effects on urban Where schemes/initiatives are time limited,
population are therefore expected from new replacement measures need to be
policies and interventions which encourage implemented to maximise the opportunity for
modal shift away from private car use and benefits over time.
those that promote active travel.
Promoting exposure reduction and ensure
Minor adverse health effects for population that any new road links are isolated from
near strategic road network, and those close vulnerable receptors, would reduce the
to new proposed road links are expected from harmful effects of the policies promoting
policies promoting additional road links or additional road links or upgrading local and
upgrading local and strategic road network. strategic road network.
Future cleaner technologies may play a key
Strategic and major schemes will be delivered
role in reducing the amount of air pollution
through the appropriate consenting process
from transport in the longer term.
and will need to be subject to Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) and other
relevant environmental legislation. Detailed
mitigation and enhancement opportunities
will be developed as part of the design and
consenting process at the scheme level.

161
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 1:
Summary of Environmental Report continued

SEA OBJECTIVE POTENTIAL SIGNIFICANT EFFECTS MITIGATION
(SEAO)
SEAO 3: ‘Reduce Numerous policies within the LTP4 will have a Public transport vehicles should be of high
transport related minor or potential major positive effect on this modern standards.
carbon emissions SEA objective. However, there is significant Where schemes / initiatives are time limited,
in line with uncertainty in the assessment. Most of the new replacement measures need to be
national targets’ polices require a modal shift away from implemented to maximise the opportunity for
private car use, to more sustainable mode of benefits over time.
transports (e.g. bus, rail, tram, cycling).
Strategic and major schemes will be delivered
Success of the policies in the long term will through the appropriate consenting process
depend upon whether traffic growth can be and will need to be subject to EIA and other
curbed and whether the required behavioural relevant environmental legislation. Detailed
change associated with a shift towards mitigation and enhancement opportunities
sustainable travel modes takes place. will be developed as part of the design and
consenting process at the scheme level.
SEAO 4: ‘Adapt It is expected that new transport Strategic and major transport infrastructure
transport infrastructure will be designed to be more schemes will have to be designed to take
network to resilient to climate change than existing into the effects of climate change in line with
effects of climate transport infrastructure. However, the low- national policy and best practice design such
change and lying nature of much of the sub-region, and its as CIRIA Report C753 The SuDS Manual.
minimise the coastal and tidal location, mean flood risk is Additionally, all strategic and major schemes
vulnerability likely to be an increasing concern. will be delivered through the appropriate
of transport The potential effects of climate change and consenting process and will be subject
network to flood sea level rise are of particular relevance in to Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) and EIA.
risk’ the areas of the sub-region most affected Detailed mitigation and enhancement
by flooding. The potential effect of policies opportunities will be developed as part of the
and interventions involving new major design and consenting process at the scheme
infrastructure has been identified as uncertain level.
at this SEA level. Policies and interventions Use of information regarding weather
aimed at improving connectivity at local conditions and impact on travel can benefit
level and neighbourhood levels have been transport users.
assessed as having mainly neutral effects on
this SEA objective.

162
March 2020

SEA OBJECTIVE POTENTIAL SIGNIFICANT EFFECTS MITIGATION
(SEAO)
SEAO 5: ‘Protect Policies and interventions involving strategic The WoE JSP committed the authorities to
and enhance and major transport infrastructure schemes develop a WoE Green Infrastructure (GI)
biodiversity have been identified as having adverse Plan and to delivering a ‘net gain’ for the
and ecological effects on this SEA Objective, some of environment. The Green Infrastructure
networks’’ them potentially major adverse. European Strategy, currently under preparation,
designated sites are particularly sensitive will identify the strategic measures and
receptors. mechanisms to support, guide and implement
The Habitats Regulations Screening exercise the delivery of environmental commitments
has identified some likely significant effects set within future strategic planning and Local
of major schemes on European sites and Plans, including mitigation for protected
therefore it is going to be necessary to sites. Further development of GI Plans at an
advance to the appropriate assessment (AA) authority level should also reflect schemes
stage of HRA. The assessment of the effects within this JLTP4.
on this SEA objective are preliminary and will All strategic and major schemes will be
need to be informed by the findings of the HRA delivered through the appropriate consenting
AA. Please refer to the Habitats Regulations process and will be subject to EIA and
Screening Stage Summary prepared by relevant environmental mitigation. Detailed
ClearLead for further information. mitigation and monitoring measures will be
developed as part of the EIA process. it is
recommended that major schemes have a
Construction Environmental Management
Plan (CEMP).
The Habitats Regulation AA will provide
the information with regards to mitigation
associated with potential significant effects on
European sites.
SEAO6: ‘Promote Most of the policies and interventions included All strategic and major schemes will be
human health’ in the Draft JLTP4 have as key objective delivered through the appropriate consenting
promoting more sustainable and active modes process and will be subject to EIA which
of travel which would result in likely long- includes assessment of health. Detailed
term benefits on human health. Encouraging mitigation and monitoring measures to
more journeys to be made by active travel minimise potential adverse effects will
modes improves physical and mental health, be developed as part of the EIA process.
quality of life and the environment. Direct Enhancement opportunities should also be
beneficial effects on human health would considered as part of the development and
result from increased physical activity consenting process of the larger schemes.
whilst indirect effects may derive from less Any charging scheme should consider
congested roads as well as improved access exemptions for drivers with specific need,
to services and opportunities which may those on low income or unemployed
tackle some of the inequality issues which seeking access to employment or education
may also underlain health issues. Beneficial opportunities.
effects might be offset by increased noise, air
pollution and / or severance resulting from
some of the proposed strategic road and rail
improvements.

163
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 1:
Summary of Environmental Report continued

SEA OBJECTIVE POTENTIAL SIGNIFICANT EFFECTS MITIGATION
(SEAO)
SEAO7: Improve The majority of polices will have a positive Where schemes / initiatives are time limited,
road safety, impact on improving road safety. Particularly, new replacement measures need to be
particularly for Policy W2 (which improves the road safety for implemented to maximise the opportunity for
vulnerable users, motorcyclists), Policy L1 (through providing benefits over time.
and to reduce education for cyclists) and Policy L2 (using Road safety camera enforcement provides
road casualties’ education and implementation of cycle lanes opportunity for driver education. Targeting
etc.) will all have a long-term major positive road safety campaigns at motorcyclist
impact on the SEA objective. safety. Motorcyclists are disproportionally
represented in road accident statistics.
New projects should be subject to safety
audit checks and aim to improve road safety
through design.
SEAO8: Minimise Policies and interventions involving major As noted under SEAO 5 above, further
adverse effects transport infrastructure schemes have been development of GI Plans at an authority level
on soils such as identified as having adverse effects on this should also reflect schemes within this JLTP4.
loss, compaction, SEA Objective. Strategic and major road and All strategic and major schemes will be
erosion and rail infrastructure schemes would result in delivered through the appropriate consenting
pollution from direct adverse effects on soils in terms of process and it is recommended that major
transport-related loss and compaction where these are to be schemes have a CEMP. This would include
activities’ delivered on undeveloped land. Operational mitigation and monitoring measures to
effects may result in pollution, erosion and avoid and minimise the degradation of soil
increased run-off. resources.
Due to the relative permanence and
irreversibility of soil loss, the potential
effect should be regarded as significant.
Transport schemes to be delivered on
previously developed land would result in
beneficial effects through the remediation of
contaminated soils.

164
March 2020

SEA OBJECTIVE POTENTIAL SIGNIFICANT EFFECTS MITIGATION
(SEAO)
SEAO9: ‘Protect, Policies and interventions involving major Detailed design should follow best practice
and where transport infrastructure schemes have been guidance such as that provided within CIRIA
possible improve, identified as having potential to result in Report C753 The SuDS Manual. The guidance
water quality’ adverse effects on this SEA Objective. The covers the planning, design, construction
quality of water in rivers, streams, rhynes and and maintenance of Sustainable Drainage
ditches can be affected by the construction of Systems (SuDS) to assist with their effective
transport infrastructure as well because of implementation within both new and existing
its operation through pollution and accidental developments. It looks at how to maximise
spillages. It is expected, however, that new amenity and biodiversity benefits and deliver
transport infrastructure will be designed the key objectives of managing flood risk and
following current best practice guidance and water quality.
hence should include mitigation measures As noted under SEAO 5 above, further
inherent to the scheme design. Overall, the development of GI Plans at an authority
potential effect on this SEA objective has been level should also reflect schemes within this
assessed as being uncertain for those policies JLTP4. All strategic and major schemes
involving major infrastructure works. There will be delivered through the appropriate
is the potential for adverse effects but also consenting process and will be subject to
opportunities for beneficial effects through EIA and relevant environmental mitigation.
improved drainage design. Detailed mitigation and monitoring measures
will be developed as part of the EIA process.
it is recommended that major schemes have
a CEMP.
SEAO10: Generally, policies and interventions under Seek to make best use of existing
‘Minimise waste consideration seek to make good use of infrastructure to minimise resource
produced and existing infrastructure whilst new schemes consumption and waste generation before
resources would be designed in line with relevant constructing new facilities.
consumed policy and legislation aimed at minimising the Ensure scheme design incorporates
by transport production of waste and making sustainable sustainable use of materials as well as
infrastructure use of resources. However, JLTP4 comprises measures to minimise future maintenance
and operation major new transport infrastructure which requirements.
of transport will result in significant use of materials
For construction projects, a Site Waste
services’ such as aggregates and generation of waste.
Management Plan (SWMP) should be
Interventions aimed at promoting alternative
implemented. New development can be
modes to private car would reduce reliance
designed to increase the potential for
on fossil fuels. The overall effect on this SEA
recycling waste.
objective is likely to be adverse.
New transport modes should use sustainable
fuels (electric). There should also be modal
shift to public transport and active travel from
car use.

165
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 1:
Summary of Environmental Report continued

SEA OBJECTIVE POTENTIAL SIGNIFICANT EFFECTS MITIGATION
(SEAO)
SEAO11: Protect In the short and medium term, the The JLTP4 provides an opportunity to improve
and enhance the construction of strategic and major schemes the setting and integrity of the WoE’s historic
rich diversity is likely to adversely affect heritage. However, places, and ensure future development is
of the historical some policies (W5 and W1) are likely to reduce appropriately considered and designed to
and cultural pressure from traffic in the cities of Bath and respond to local context.
environment, its Bristol and therefore reduce impacts on their Good design (following best practice
heritage assets cultural heritage assets. Due to the relative guidance such as Highways England – the
and their setting’ permanence and irreversibility of damage to road to good design (2018)), and cultural
heritage assets, the potential effects (both heritage assessments (as part of EIA where
adverse and beneficial) should be regarded as appropriate) should be required for all
significant. strategic and major schemes to minimise
potential adverse impacts and maximise
opportunities for benefits.
SEAO12: Maintain Noise and congestion from traffic can Good design (following best practice guidance
and enhance seriously degrade the quality of the urban such as Highways England – the road to good
the quality and environment. The policies which are likely to design (2018)), and landscape/townscape
character of the have the most positive on this SEA objective and visual assessments (as part of EIA
built environment are those which limit opportunity for private where appropriate) should be required in
and landscape’ car use within urban centres and free up all strategic and major schemes to minimise
space for other activities and improvements to potential adverse impacts and maximise
the urban realm. opportunities for benefits.
Impacts from major schemes are likely to be Design the proposed infrastructure sensitively
on green belt land around the urban fringes. to reduced visual impact and to include
Introduction of new infrastructure would effective landscaping schemes to soften any
result in negative impacts on the landscape in major structures.
terms of visual impacts and increased noise It is recommended that signage and
during construction and operation. Major infrastructure for pedestrians and cyclists
development schemes also have the potential is designed to be sympathetic to the local
to have impacts on landscape setting. distinctiveness whilst remaining clear, visible
and informative.
Further development of The West of England’s
GI Plans at an authority level should also
reflect schemes within this JLTP4.
A modal shift away from car use is needed to
maximise the potential beneficial impacts of
JLTP4 on this SEA objective.
Measures to discourage car use within urban
centres should be pursued to maximise use
of alternative modes provided and to reduce
traffic congestion and noise.

166
March 2020

The SEA Statement shows how the JLTP4 was soils and potentially water quality. This is also
updated to reflect the mitigations requirements the case for potential effects on cultural and
identified by the SEA and shown in the table above. built environment. Mitigation / enhancement
This will be completed post adoption of JLTP4 and measures included as part of the design and
published on the JLTP section of the travelwest implementation of the specific schemes may
website. offset some of the adverse effects.
Generally, the certainty of the assessment has The following alternative scenarios were also
been assessed as being low to medium. The main assessed against the SEA Objectives:
reasons for this are listed below:
l Continuation of JLTP3 (with period plan
l Despite the strong commitment to shift journeys extended to cover the period up to 2036)
into cleaner and more sustainable transport
modes, there are various degrees of uncertainty
l The “Without Plan” Scenario
with regards to planned actions, programme Continuation of JLTP3 and JLTP4 perform
and funding of some of the interventions equally in SEA Objectives 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 12.
l There is uncertainty regarding whether JLTP4 performs better against SEA Objectives
improvements to the public transport system 3 and 6, whilst Continuation of JLTP3 performs
from the major schemes would be sufficient better against SEA Objectives 2, 5 and 11. The
to counteract traffic growth and associated “Without Plan” performs worst against all the SEA
adverse environmental effects. The implications objectives.
of removal of the Severn Crossing Toll are a key Cumulative effects:
unknown
The JLTP4 is intrinsically linked to future strategic
l Advanced technologies are currently in early planning. The type of development involved in
development stages both plans will result in similar type of effects
and in some locations they will affect the same
l Uncertainty regarding the rate of climate change environmental and other assets. Cumulative effects
and the degree to which it will alter weather are therefore expected from the implementation
patterns in the medium and longer term of these two plans. A coordinated and supportive
l Information from the Habitats Regulations approach to mitigation and enhancement
Assessment is required to better understand between the plans will assist with minimising
potential adverse effects on European the likelihood and scale of adverse effects and
designated sites maximising potential benefits. The development
and implementation of the WoE GI Plan has
l Effects are likely to be both variable across the been identified as the environmental strategic
region and dependent upon proximity of the framework to facilitate this. The cumulative effect
sensitive receptors to the road network between the JLTP4 and the Local Air Quality
l There are also uncertainties about route Strategies of the WoE authorities have been
alignments as well as specific design details assessed as being beneficial. A combination of
such as use of material and sitting both adverse and beneficial effects is expected
as a result of the JLTP4 in combination with the
l The combined effect of the predicted growth WoE Adopted Joint Waste Core Strategy 2011
in the region with the various transport and the local transport plans of the neighbouring
infrastructure schemes that may go ahead authorities.
are likely to adversely affect biodiversity,
167
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 1:
Summary of Environmental Report continued

Monitoring:
The SEA Regulations require that monitoring is
undertaken on a plan so that the significant effects
of implementation can be identified and remedial
action imposed. A monitoring framework for the
SEA will be developed following consultation on
this SEA. Given the links between JLTP4 and future
strategic planning, a coordinated approach to
monitoring will be considered.

Next Steps:
The SEA Environmental Report will be made
available at the same time as the draft plan or
programme, as an integral part of the consultation
process

168
March 2020

Appendix 2:
Scheme Summary Table – categories
Connectivity Timescale
l Beyond the West of England – schemes that The indicative timescale for implementation of the
improve journeys into and out of the West of scheme is shown as follows:
England, including to other areas in the South
West, South Wales, national and international
l Short – by 2021

l Within West of England – a scheme that
l Medium – by 2026
improves other journeys wholly within the West l Long – by 2036
of England, but longer than approximately 10km,
including those between main urban areas
Type of scheme
l Local – a scheme that improves journeys of up
to approximately 10km, including all journeys l T – Transformational
wholly within one urban area and those between l C – Committed early investment scheme
neighbouring rural areas, and rural and urban
areas. Many of these schemes will also benefit l E – Early investment scheme under
neighbourhood connectivity development
l LP – Local Plan
Principal Mode
l L – Other longer-term opportunities
l Active Travel – cycling and walking
Scheme type and priority are subject to change
l Freight – by rail, road or water based on the timing and purpose of emerging
funding opportunities, such as Central Government
l Highway – schemes that benefit all motor
bidding windows and developer contributions.
vehicles
l Multimodal – schemes that benefit a number of
principal modes
l Public Transport – local bus, metrobus, mass
transit, Park & Ride, rail
l Other – other modes or supporting measures

Cost Level
The indicative cost level (current prices, including
risk allowance) is provided as follows:
l Low – up to £50m
l Medium – £50m to £200m
l High – more than £200m

169
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 2:
Scheme summary table categories continued

170
March 2020

Appendix 3:
Major scheme details
Transformational Major Schemes
Ref Mass Transit Scheme Details
T1 Bristol City Centre Segregated mass transit route connecting Bristol Airport and South Bristol with
to Airport city centre. Through the current mass transit studies and the Bristol South West
Economic Link project (BSWEL) (see Scheme Ref. E1), various options are being
considered for assessment. Those options which perform well against an initial
set of criteria will then be developed into more detailed option variants for further
assessment. Options are being considered for bus, metrobus, tram, tram-train,
mass transit (fully segregated underground running) and heavy rail. Route to be
determined balancing maximising patronage against engineering costs. The heavy
rail option assessment includes a potential heavy rail link from Bristol Temple
Meads.
T2 Bristol City Centre A mass transit route providing high frequency, high capacity and fast public
to Bath transport services between Bristol and Bath. The route from Hicks Gate to Bristol
will be facilitated by diversion of traffic onto the Callington Road Link to enable
reallocation of roadspace from car to public transport within Bristol. Careful
consideration of routing options and future management of roadspace between
Bristol and Bath, will be required. In the short term metrobus would provide mass
transit along the corridor from Bristol to Bath, and in the longer term there is an
ambition for light rail.
T3 Bristol City Centre A dedicated, segregated mass transit route providing high frequency, higher
to East Fringe capacity and faster public transport services connecting central Bristol and the
East Fringe and associated infrastructure to provide a high-quality passenger
experience. Sections of the dedicated route would probably need to be delivered
below surface due to highway capacity constraints on the A420 and A432
corridors and environmental constraints on the Bristol-Bath Railway Path. It
includes the A420/Ring road Park & Ride site(s).
T4 Bristol City Centre A dedicated, segregated mass transit route providing high frequency, higher
to North Fringe capacity and faster public transport services between central Bristol, North
Bristol and the North Fringe with associated infrastructure to provide a high
quality passenger experience. Constraints on the A38 Gloucester Road and
other corridors mean that an underground alignment should be considered as
one of the options to fully achieve the scheme objectives. This scheme would be
complementary to the North Fringe – Hengrove metrobus scheme currently being
delivered and the planned MetroWest programme.
T5 Bath city centre Introducing light rail in Bath city and environs. Given the environmental and
and corridors physical constraints trams should be one of the options considered. All key routes
will be considered including:
– A367 Odd Down
– Newbridge – either along the A4 or A36 integrating with the new rapid transit
corridor between bath and Bristol
– Lansdown from the north of Bath
– A4 from the east of Bath

171
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 3:
Major scheme details continued

Early investment schemes in progress (committed projects)
Ref Scheme Details
C1 M49 Avonmouth New M49 Avonmouth junction to improve access to the port of Avonmouth and the
junction Avonmouth Severnside Enterprise Area; works are expected to be completed by the
end of 2019.
C2 Temple Quarter Masterplan to cover the 70-hectare development zone, to feature a mixed-use quarter
masterplan comprising up to 11,000 homes and a revitalised transport interchange, including
improvements to Temple Meads railway station. The masterplan will include station
capacity improvements, better access to Temple Meads and the area, with new public
space and improvements to the public realm. The project will also involve a sensitive
adaptation, development and protection of the grade 1 listed station, which was
designed by Brunel.
C3 MetroWest Phase 1 Upgraded train services to half-hourly connections for Severn Beach Line and the
Bath Spa to Bristol line. Reopening the Portishead Line to passenger services with
an hourly service is a priority for WoE authorities. New station at Portishead and the
reopening of former Pill Station.
HRA Mitigation
The MetroWest Phase 1 project level HRA proposes a series of mitigation measures,
including implementing protective measures during scheme construction which would
reduce the adverse effects on the Avon Gorge Woodlands SAC. However, it is not
possible to avoid the loss of up to 0.71ha of woodland within the SAC and therefore an
adverse effect on this SAC remains following mitigation.
The project level HRA has therefore proceeded to evaluate the alternatives to the
MetroWest Phase 1 scheme, however, it has not been possible to identify any feasible
alternatives to this scheme. It is therefore necessary for this scheme to advance to
the ‘IROPI test’ (imperative reasons of overriding public interest). The IROPI that have
been considered within the project level HRA relates to human health, public safety
and important environmental benefits. Compensatory measures are also provided
within the project level HRA, including habitat management and planting of additional
woodland with whitebeams. However, as a result of the European Court of Justice
interpretation of the Habitats Directive, these measures cannot be taken into account
in the assessment of the implications of the project.
C4 MetroWest Phase 2 Reopening of Henbury line to an hourly spur and increase train services to Yate. New
stations at Henbury, North Filton and Ashley Down.
C5 Hengrove Internal roads and creating access for metrobus through urban living site of around
Transport Package 1500 homes.
C6 Lockleaze Including bus lane on Muller road and accessible pathway through Stoke Park to cater
Transport Package for urban living sites in Lockleaze (800 homes).
C7 Metrobus Cribbs An extension to the existing North Fringe to Hengrove metrobus route. Metrobus
Patchway from Bristol Parkway to The Mall via Hatchet Road, Gipsy Patch Lane, North Way and
extension CPNN. Includes bus lanes and bus links to enable rapid, reliable metrobus services to
connect existing and planned residential, employment and leisure areas in the North
Fringe. Bus priority includes bus links at San Andreas roundabout and North Way,
and bus lanes on Gipsy Patch Lane. The replacement of the existing railway bridge
at Gipsy Patch Lane with a wider bridge to remove the pinch-point for motorised and
172 nonmotorised users is a key element of the scheme.
March 2020

Early investment schemes under development
Ref Scheme Details
E1 Bristol South West New multimodal corridor between the M5 and the A38, Bristol Airport, South Bristol
Economic Link and Bristol City Centre to improve connectivity and overall network resilience. The
(BSWEL) BSWEL Options Assessment Report grouped together the various options to form
packages, based on their broad geographical location and their likely ability to meet
the project objectives in a coherent way. The packages are labelled from 1-8, indicating
the potential order of implementation, although this will depend on funding sources
and engagement with external partners:
• Package 1: Weston-super-Mare bus network improvements; Weston-super-Mare to
Bristol bus services with metrobus compatibility (complementary services);
• Package 2: A38 online improvements between A368 to Bristol Airport, along with
Downside Road junction improvements. A38 widening at Bristol Airport;
• Package 3: Banwell Bypass; Rail options: Weston Parkway station; Weston-super-
Mare (WsM) – Weston Parkway – Bristol Airport bus service;
• Package 4: A38 offline improvements between Bristol Airport and South Bristol Link
(SBL); A38/SBL Park & Ride; Highway improvements for Churchill and Sandford;
• Package 5: M5 new junction J21A
• Package 6: Rail options: Bristol Airport Rail Link Phase One: Bristol Airport to Bristol
Temple Meads
• Package 7: Rail options: Bristol Airport Rail Link Phase Two: Bristol Airport to Bristol
Temple Meads, Severn Beach/Bath Spa, Bristol Airport to Weston-super-Mare/
Taunton
• Package 8: A370-A38 Link
HRA Mitigation
For BSWEL Packages 6, 7 & 8, the JLTP4 HRA recommends that this scheme is subject
to a project-level HRA when sufficient scheme information is available. If a Likely
Significant Effect (LSE) is screened-in during the project level HRA then an Appropriate
Assessment should be undertaken. The Appropriate Assessment should input into
the design and location of this scheme to ensure no adverse effect on European sites
occur. Permission should only be granted and this scheme allowed to go ahead if the
Appropriate Assessment are able to conclude that no adverse effects will occur on
European sites.
E2 East of Bath access Provision of a high quality north-south route connecting the south coast to the M4.
improvements This route will enable north-south traffic to avoid passing through Bath.

173
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 3:
Major scheme details continued

Early investment schemes under development

Ref Scheme Details
E3 M5 Junction 19 Improvements to M5 Junction 19 to improve access between the M5 and the Royal
Portbury Dock, Portishead, Portbury and Pill. The scheme will provide enhanced
capacity to improve the efficiency of movements for freight using the Royal Portbury
Dock, enhancing connectivity to national road networks. The scheme will also assist in
accommodating future traffic growth generated by planned housing and employment
growth in the area.
E4 Passenger Package of rail improvement measures: Rail service improvements, bringing the
Rail Service frequency of local rail services up to a minimum of 2 tph, plus hourly rail services
and Capacity from Weston-super-Mare to London.
Improvements, • Infrastructure to support service improvements including double tracks on the loop
Station Upgrades line between Weston Railway Station, reinstating the southern chord at Weston-
and New Stations super-Mare, and the Herluin Way to Locking Road Link (bridge replacement to
Package enable width for double tracking).
• Longer rolling stock to cater for increased demand, in conjunction with longer
platforms where required (including Worle, Nailsea & Backwell and Yatton), with
higher quality rolling stock from all stations.
• Station upgrades for existing rail stations with a focus on developing transport
interchanges (interchange with metrobus, Mass Transit, bus services and cycle and
car parking provision), in conjunction with schemes to improve access to existing rail
stations by sustainable modes on key routes to stations across the West of England.
• New railway stations at the following locations: Constable Road, Bristol; Ashton Gate,
Bristol; St Annes, Brislington, Bristol; Saltford, Bath & North East Somerset. Stations
to be delivered with associated infrastructure: passenger waiting facilities, bus stops,
cycle stands, car parking, real-time information and be fully Equality Act compliant.
Westerleigh junction upgrade.
E5 Smart Motorways: Smart Motorway scheme on the M4 from J18 (A46, Tormarton) to J19 (M32).* This
M4 J18-19 will complement the recently delivered M4 J19-20 and M5 J15-17 Smart Motorway to
provide an extensive system of motorway management on the most congested parts
of the network. The M4 J18-19 scheme will deliver increased capacity and enhanced
reliability to complement the delivery of the new M4 J18A (to provide direct access to
the Bristol East Fringe).
* schemes to be progressed in light of the outcome of the safety review by Highways England
and the DfT

174
March 2020

Early investment schemes under development

Ref Scheme Details
E6 M5 new junction A new Junction 21A on the M5 motorway south of the existing J21. This will be
J21A supported by a new multimodal corridor connecting the new junction with the
A38, with a bypass for Banwell in the short to medium term, and potential highway
improvements at Sandford and Churchill in the medium to long term. Major
improvements to the A38 between Langford and South Bristol will further improve
connectivity. The scheme will improve links to the airport and improve resilience of
the Strategic Road Network and locally will improve access to potential housing and
residential growth.
E7 A4174 Ring Junction improvements supported by JTS linked to orbital bus route and J18a link.
Road junction Wraxall Rd junction will be improved to improve access onto the Ring Road and safety
improvements at the roundabout.
including Wraxall
Road (Longwell
Green)
E8 Freezing Hill This includes improvements at three junctions along the route between the A420 and
junction upgrade Lansdown P&R, known as Freezing Hill Lane. Currently there are excessive delays and
and whole route the route isn't suitable for the number of vehicles using it to access Lansdown P&R.
improvements The scheme also includes localised widening of the Freezing Hill Lane route.

175
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 3:
Major scheme details continued

Early investment schemes under development

Ref Scheme Details
E9 Interurban cycle Strategic cycle routes across the region to supplement those detailed in the Corridor
routes Scheme Packages to mitigate growth. Many of these will be delivered along the
metrobus corridors and some will be identified through the West of England Local
Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan.
HRA Mitigation: Protecting & enhancing the natural environment with Interurban
Cycle Routes
The proposed cycleways within the JLTP4 are indicative at this stage and yet to be
finalised. It is therefore not possible to fully assess the potential environmental effects
of each route. Some cycle routes will be included within the Cycling and Walking
Infrastructure Plan. It is therefore recommended that an HRA of the Local Cycling and
Walking Infrastructure Plans would ascertain the predicted level of use of new cycle
routes in the WoE and therefore more accurately predict the potential for an adverse
effect on the European sites identified and be able to put forward suitable mitigation.
The Interurban cycle routes which form part of scheme E9 will not be included within
the Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan. It is therefore proposed that the potential
effects of recreational pressures resulting from the following cycle routes are
assessed through project-level HRA of the individual schemes, as well as a separate
HRA of the WoE Local Cycling and Walking Infrastructure Plan:
• Strawberry Line Cycle Route (Interurban Cycle Routes - E9);
• Weston Town Centre to J21 Cycle Route (Weston-super-Mare: Local walking &
cycling infrastructure improvements – LP5);
• Banwell - Churchill Cycle Route (Banwell and Churchill: Sustainable travel package –
LP6); and
• North Somerset Coastal Towns Cycle Route, particularly the WSM to Sand Bay and
Sand Bay to Clevedon sections (Interurban Cycle Routes - E9).
It is recommended that the requirement for HRA of individual cycle route schemes is
included within the JLTP4. If an LSE is identified in screening during the project level
HRA then an Appropriate Assessment should be undertaken and schemes should only
be granted permission and allowed to go ahead if the Appropriate Assessment is able
to demonstrate that there would be no adverse effects on these European sites, either
alone or in combination with other plans and projects. The Appropriate Assessment
should input into the design and location of the cycleways as appropriate. There is
also an opportunity for the cycleways to provide linkages as a part of the local green
infrastructure networks and it is recommended that this opportunity if referred to
within the JLTP4.
It is also assumed that all cycleways will eventually be incorporated into Local Plans
as part of infrastructure delivery. Local Plans will be subject to their own HRAs and
new cycleways will be considered within the HRAs along with other developments.
Through their HRAs, the Local Plans of the WoE authorities would need to
demonstrate that there would be no adverse effect on the North Somerset Bats SAC
and the Severn Estuary SPA, SAC and Ramsar as a result of the transport schemes
before the plans are adopted.

176
March 2020

Early investment schemes under development

Ref Scheme Details
E10 M4 Junction 18A to New motorway junction on the M4 (Junction 18A) between Junction 19 for Bristol
A4174 Ring Road and Junction 18 for Bath, providing a new highway link between the M4 and the
A4174 Ring Road near the Emersons Green Enterprise Area. It would necessitate
improvements to the M4 between Junction 19 and the new Junction 18A, plus
improvements to junctions on the A4174. The scheme was considered in a feasibility
study undertaken by South Gloucestershire Council and in partnership with Highways
England which examined potential location options for the junction and link road. South
Gloucestershire Council’s Cabinet considered the outcome of the feasibility study in
March 2018 and Option 1 (the Western Option at Emersons Green) was agreed as the
Council’s preferred location. The study has been provided to Highways England for
their consideration.
E11 Metrobus – Bristol Metrobus route from Clevedon and Nailsea to Bristol City Centre, a rapid transit
City Centre to limited stop service with an emphasis on segregation from general traffic with bus
Clevedon and lanes. The section within Bristol would use the infrastructure for the Ashton Vale
Nailsea to Temple Meads route, which was completed in September 2018. This will help to
support growth at Nailsea and Backwell and improve connectivity and travel choices.
E12 Metrobus A package of measures to make further enhancements to the existing metrobus
consolidation network, with potential measures including fleet upgrade, addition of descoped
package infrastructure, signals replacement, and Great Stoke ('Rabbit') roundabout.
E13 Sustainable travel Increasing high-quality, sustainable travel options for the city of Bath to expand,
package for Bath complement and/or offer alternatives to existing Park & Ride/transport interchanges
at Lansdown, Odd Down and Newbridge.
E14 Regional Electric Increasing public charging infrastructure, including through ‘Go Ultra Low West’
Vehicle Charging (Source West) EV charging infrastructure programme.
Network
E15 Metrobus – Bristol Metrobus route from Severnside to Bristol City Centre via the A403 and A4 Portway,
City Centre to connecting into existing metrobus infrastructure in Central Bristol. The route would
Severnside connect the logistics cluster at Severnside and Avonmouth with Bristol City Centre
via the Portway Park & Ride site. This would improve travel options and connectivity
for employees and businesses in accessing Severnside and Avonmouth. The scheme
builds on the extensive existing bus priority on the A4 Portway, with extended bus
priority, enhanced stops and upgraded metrobus services. In particular, further bus
priorities including potential bus-only links would be needed into Severnside.
E16 Bath Cycle Completion of a continuous and integrated network of strategic cycle routes and their
Network and City associated infrastructure, comprising key corridors and cross city and/or river routes,
Centre Package complemented by improved permeability and investment in public realm in the city
centre. This network will connect key destinations across the Bath urban area. Local
routes will be improved and integrated into the strategic network as part of ongoing
programmes.

177
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 3:
Major scheme details continued

Early investment schemes under development

Ref Scheme Details
E17 Keynsham / Keynsham town centre public realm/ regeneration improvements to encourage
Midsomer Norton sustainable modes of travel, such as walking, cycling and public transport. Including
and Somer Valley strategic cycling routes to/from Bath, Bristol, east/ north Bristol and within Keynsham
Public Realm including completion of the link from the Somerdale cycle bridge via the River Avon
Improvements towpath to the Keynsham Peninsular and the Bristol/Bath strategic cycle network.
Packages Midsomer Norton town centre public realm/ regeneration improvements to encourage
sustainable modes of travel, such as walking, cycling and public transport. Highway,
cyclist and pedestrian improvements linking the Somer Valley Enterprise Zone with
the A37 to the west and the wider Somer Valley to the east.
E18 Weston-super- Package of multimodal highway/junction improvements to complement and support
Mare Package 2 the other Weston-super-Mare schemes. These could include, but not be limited to,
the M5 Junction 21 Bypass, A370/A371 Airport Roundabout, Cross Airfeld Link/A371
Roundabout, West Wick Roundabout, Airfeld Bridge Link (which is likely to be bus/
cycle/ped only) and Herluin Way to Locking Road Link.
E19 Weston-super- Completion of a network of legible, attractive and safe strategic cycle routes in the
Mare Cycling and Weston-super-Mare area, with a focus on east-west routes from Worle and Weston
Walking Network Villages into the town centre. Within the Weston-super-Mare Town Centre Masterplan
and SPD. This includes better pedestrian and cycling facilities to serve Weston-super-
Mare as part of future strategic planning and Core Strategy growth.
E20 Banwell Bypass Bypass to the north of Banwell, linking the A371 with A368. The bypass will enable
potential development opportunities north of Banwell and support the delivery
of Weston Villages; provide a more suitable strategic route for HGVs, and most
importantly provide signifcant improvements to air quality and public realm in the
centre of the village. This new infrastructure is a key element of the Bristol South West
Economic Link (BSWEL).

178
March 2020

Early investment schemes under development

Ref Scheme Details
E21 South East Bristol A4 metrobus + Callington Road Link
and Whitchurch metrobus service along the A4 corridor between Keynsham and Bristol, incorporating
Callington Road Link to reduce congestion on the A4.
A37 Sustainable Transport
Package of bus priority and enhanced bus services to Whitchurch, possibly including
extension of metrobus from Hengrove, and Park & Ride option at Whitchurch.
Hicks Gate interchange
New Park & Ride/transport interchange at Hicks Gate junction – this would replace the
existing Brislington Park & Ride site.
Hicks Gate Junction
Changes to existing roundabout layout including a new link between the A4174 and A4
Keynsham Bypass.
South East Bristol Orbital Low Carbon Corridor
Transport infrastructure improvements creating a multimodal orbital corridor to
facilitate north/south connectivity incorporating metrobus. Measures to improve
public transport movements and reduce single occupancy private car movements
through the area.
Local highway improvements
Local traffic management schemes, including improvements to Whitchurch Lane
towards Hengrove, and traffic management on A37 towards Pensford.
E22 Keynsham Keynsham railway station
Review of access arrangements and passenger waiting facilities to enhance the
attractiveness of rail for commuting and other travel needs from wider Keynsham
area.
A4-A4175 corridor
Corridor between the A4 and A4175 including new bridges over the railway line.
Avon Mill Lane improvements
Improvements to convert Avon Mill Lane and A4175 junction to a roundabout with
enhanced pedestrian and cycle facilities.
New sustainable travel measures
Package of strategic cycle corridor, bus priority, and enhanced bus services to Bristol
and Bath. Including a direct link to the Bristol Bath Railway Path.
Hicks Gate Junction
Changes to existing roundabout layout including a new link between the A4174 and A4
Keynsham Bypass.
Local highway improvements
Improvements to other junctions affected by traffic, including A4 / B3116 Roundabout
(between Keynsham and Saltford) and A420 / A4175 junction at Bridgeyate (in South
Gloucs).

179
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 3:
Major scheme details continued

Joint Transport Study schemes
Ref Scheme Details
LP1 Yate and Coalpit A432 metrobus, walking and cycling
Heath Package of strategic cycling corridor, bus priority, and enhanced bus services (including
metrobus) to Coalpit Heath and Yate and potential Park & Ride option west of Yate.
Yate railway station
Package of measures to improve access and enhance waiting facilities, including
improved bus interchange on A432.
Winterbourne and Frampton Cotterell Bypass
Single carriageway link between Stoke Gifford and Iron Acton, bypassing Winterbourne
and Frampton Cotterell.
Local highway improvements
Improvements to other parts of the network impacted by traffic, to include B4057
between Winterbourne and Stoke Gifford, B4058 / B4059 junctions at Iron Acton, and
route between Yate and East Fringe via Westerleigh.
Coalpit Heath and Westerleigh Bypass
A new multimodal corridor (road and cycle route) from Yate to Emersons Green and
the east of Bristol, connecting with the Ring Road and possibly a new M4 Junction 18A.
The new link would connect the A432 Badminton Road to Westerleigh Road providing
access to new employment and housing in Yate. This may be required instead of, or
together with, a Winterbourne and Frampton Cotterell Bypass. This link would provide
additional capacity, freeing up road space on the A432 for metrobus.
LP2 Nailsea and Nailsea sustainable travel, rail station and local network improvements
Backwell Enhanced bus services, including options for improved connections to Bristol via the
Long Ashton Park & Ride and metrobus M2 service, explore improved interchange at
Nailsea & Backwell rail station.
Nailsea – Backwell A370
New link from Nailsea to A370 including crossing of the rail line, providing improved
access to potential development locations.
Clevedon-Nailsea-Bristol transport corridor improvements
Investigate improved multimodal connections between M5 Junction 19 and Nailsea &
Backwell, and along the Clevedon-Nailsea-Bristol corridor including bus priority and
other public transport improvements.

180
March 2020

Joint Transport Study schemes

Ref Scheme Details
LP3 Thornbury, A38 metrobus, walking and cycling
Buckover and Package of strategic cycling corridor, bus priority, and enhanced bus services
Charfield (including metrobus) to Thornbury and Buckover, including potential Park & Ride
option.
Charfield Station
New railway station at Charfield (services to Bristol and Gloucester).
M5 J14
Upgraded motorway junction to a full roundabout layout, improved approaches from
east and west.
Local highway improvements
Improvements to local road network in the Thornbury, Buckover and Charfield area,
including capacity improvements at B4509 / B4058 junction at Charfield Hill.

LP4 Bristol Urban Area Bristol City Centre Framework
Multimodal package to improve connectivity and growth in Bristol city centre. Includes
enhanced cycling provision, enhanced bus priority and reorganisation of road network
in city centre core.
Local bus package (GBBN2)
Expansion of bus priority measures across the Bristol urban area and further
improvements to bus facilities to support sustained growth in bus patronage across
the city.
Bristol walking and cycling package
Improvements to walking and cycling infrastructure
HRA Mitigation
The JLTP4 HRA recommends that this scheme element is subject to a project-level
HRA when sufficient scheme information is available. If a Likely Significant Effect (LSE)
is screened-in during the project level HRA then an Appropriate Assessment should be
undertaken. The Appropriate Assessment should input into the design and location of
this scheme to ensure no adverse effect on European sites occur. Permission should
only be granted and this scheme allowed to go ahead if the Appropriate Assessment is
able to conclude that no adverse effects will occur on European sites.
M32 Park & Ride
New Park & Ride site south of M32 J1 to intercept trips into Bristol.
A38(S)/A4174 Park & Ride
New Park & Ride site at the A38/South Bristol Link roundabout, served by metrobus
and Airport Flyer services to Bristol.
A4018 Park & Ride
New Park & Ride site, possibly served by rail services to Bristol from proposed
Henbury station.
A4 Portway and A370 Long Ashton Park & Ride expansion
Expansion of existing Park & Ride sites.

181
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 3:
Major scheme details continued

Joint Transport Study schemes

Ref Scheme Details
LP5 Weston-super- Weston-super-Mare metrobus
Mare Metrobus serving Weston town centre, Weston villages, and possibly Park & Ride.
Weston-super-Mare Park & Ride
New Park & Ride site at either A370/A371 junction, M5 J21 or new junction J21A.
Local bus improvements
Additional bus priority measures and bus stop infrastructure to improve journey
reliability.
Local highway junction improvements
Upgrades and improvements to a number of junctions related to the primary
distributor route and other key junctions around the Weston-super-Mare area.
Local walking & cycling infrastructure improvements
Package of walking and cycling infrastructure improvements, to promote sustainable
transport modes

LP6 Churchill Local highway improvements
Improvements to other junctions affected by additional traffic, including A368/A38
Churchill signals.
Local sustainable travel package
Improvements to strategic and local walking and cycle networks, to improve
sustainable travel connectivity along the corridor between the A38, Churchill,
Sandford and Banwell.

182
March 2020

Other longer-term opportunities
Ref Scheme Details
L1 Strategic Rail Freight consolidation centre (rail) at Avonmouth, network loading gauge enhancements
and Road Freight on railway network, sustainable distribution projects at key stations (initially Bristol
Package Temple Meads), and restrictions on HGV movements.
HRA Mitigation
The JLTP4 HRA recommends that this scheme is subject to a project-level HRA
when sufficient scheme information is available. If a Likely Significant Effect (LSE) is
screened-in during the project level HRA then an Appropriate Assessment should be
undertaken. The Appropriate Assessment should input into the design and location of
this scheme to ensure no adverse effect on European sites occur. Permission should
only be granted and this scheme allowed to go ahead if the Appropriate Assessment
are able to conclude that no adverse effects will occur on European sites.
L2 A46 to M4 route Capacity improvements especially at the Cold Ashton roundabout to remove existing
improvements, delays between Bath and junction 18 of the M4.
Cold Ashton
L3 Bath Area New vehicles to implement fleet improvements at a faster pace. Real time information
Bus Network (RTI) screens at all stops and upgrade to thin-film-transistor (TFT) displays. New bus
Improvement priority measures, including on A367 Wellsway, A36 Lower Bristol Road and A4 London
Scheme (BABNIS) Road. New access to Bath Bus Station from Churchill Bridge.
L4 Henbury Loop rail Orbital rail service around north Bristol, introduction of passenger services along
services freight line.
L5 Rail services to This includes the reopening of the line to passenger services to Thornbury. Assumes
Thornbury the completion of the Westerleigh junction upgrade.
L6 M5 Junction 20 Improvements to the local highway network in the vicinity of M5 Junction 20
Local Highway (Clevedon) to improve transport connectivity. The scheme should look to include bus
Improvements infrastructure and priority improvements and the reallocation of roadspace to more
sustainable modes wherever possible.

183
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 3:
Major scheme details continued

Important environmental, equalities – Health Impact Assessment;
and health impact considerations for – Equalities Impact Assessment. Detailed
all JLTP4 Major Schemes mitigation and monitoring measures will be
developed as part of the assessment process,
As part of the Strategic Environmental Assessment with one of the outcomes including ensuring
(SEA), a Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) an that water quality is protected and improved
Equalities Impact Assessment (EqIA) and a Health where possible;
Impact Assessment (HIA) were also undertaken.
As part of these assessments, mitigations were – Good design (following best practice guidance
identified and updates containing these mitigations such as Highways England – the road to good
were made to the plan. Some of these mitigations design (2018)), cultural heritage assessments,
have been added to the relevant parts of the JLTP4, and landscape/townscape & visual assessments
others were already covered in the document and (as part of Environmental Impact Assessment
some of the more generic, high-level mitigations where appropriate) should be required for
regarding the major schemes have been added all strategic and major schemes to minimise
to this section. For the major scheme mitigation potential adverse impacts and maximise
requirements, the scheme-specific ones have been opportunities for benefits.
added either against references to the scheme
– For construction projects, a Site Waste
within the main body of the JLTP4 or within this
Management Plan should be implemented.
Appendix. It should be noted that all strategic
New development can be designed to increase
and major schemes will be delivered through the
the potential for recycling waste. Scheme
appropriate consenting process and will need
promoters should seek to make best use of
to be subject to the following assessments and
existing infrastructure to minimise resource
considerations:
consumption and waste generation before
– Environmental Impact Assessment and other constructing new facilities. Additonally, scheme
relevant environmental legislation; design should incorporate sustainable use of
materials as well as measures to minimise
– Flood Risk Assessment. Detailed design should future maintenance requirements.
follow best practice guidance such as that
provided within CIRIA Report C753 The SuDS – To actively contribute to reducing carbon
Manual. The guidance covers the planning, emissions and combatting climate change in line
design, construction and maintenance of with local and national policy and best practice
Sustainable Drainage Systems to assist with design such as CIRIA Report C753 The SuDS
their effective implementation within both new Manual.
and existing developments and can be applied
Emerging from these assessments, further detailed
to major schemes. It looks at how to maximise
mitigation and enhancement opportunities will be
amenity and biodiversity benefits, and deliver
developed, as part of the design and consenting
the key objectives of managing flood risk and
process.
water quality.
The Appropriate Assessment stage of the JLTP4
– Construction Environmental Management Plan
Habitats Regulation Assessment (HRA – part of the
(this would include mitigation and monitoring
Strategic Environmental Assessment) has identified
measures to avoid and minimise the degradation
a number of mitigations and considerations
of soil resources);
required to be made in major scheme development.

184
March 2020

This is so that the JLTP4 can be concluded that These schemes are:
no adverse environmental effects are likely from Mass Transit - Bristol City Centre to Airport (T1);
the full major schemes programme (except for
MetroWest Phase 1, see Section 13 for details). Local network improvements in Nailsea area (LP2);
In summary, it is recommended that the JLTP4 Nailsea–Backwell A370 (LP2);
includes the following mitigation principles: Clevedon–Nailsea–Bristol transport corridor
improvements (LP2);
Bats
A371 / A368 Banwell Bypass (E20);
All schemes within the JLTP4 need to avoid the
Juvenile Sustenance Zones around the horseshoe BSWEL Package 4: A38 (south) offline
maternity roosts within the Special Areas of improvements (E1);
Conservation (SACs). M5 Junction 19 (E3);
HRA of the West of England Local Plans to use MetroWest Phase 1 (C3);
the strategic bat survey results to produce M5 new junction J21A (E6);
horseshoe bat mitigation strategies which would Bristol City Centre to Bath (T2);
show the key bat foraging/commuting habitats
in their areas. These bat habitats would inform Bath city centre and corridors (T5);
the location and design of the schemes thereby A4-A4175 corridor (E22);
ensuring a coordinated approach to the planning of East of Bath access improvements (E2);
the schemes within the JLTP4 and SDLs proposed
Sustainable travel package for Bath (E13);
within the former regional growth plan, the JSP.
Keynsham / Midsomer Norton and Somer Valley
A project level HRA would be required for the Public Realm Improvements Packages (E17).
schemes listed in Tables 5.2 and 5.3 of the final HRA
[see below list of schemes]. These HRAs should • The project level HRA of the schemes listed in
include a Horseshoe Bat Mitigation Plan, which Tables 5.2 and 5.3 [see schemes above] should
would be informed by the results of the detailed bat also use the metric for calculating replacement
survey of each scheme undertaken in accordance horseshoe bat foraging habitat as detailed
with the Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) in the North Somerset Bats SAC SPD (or any
survey methodology. The Horseshoe Bat Mitigation subsequent updated editions). This metric would
Plan would include suitable horseshoe bat crossing be used to demonstrate that the schemes would
points to enable bats to cross the roads and result in a net gain in horseshoe bat habitat by
commute through the landscape. The crossing retaining/enhancing habitat within the proposed
points must have the following features designed in scheme and provided off-site if lost; and
accordance with best practice: • The JLTP4 schemes would only be granted
a) Underpasses to be of sufficient height to allow permission and allowed to go ahead if the HRAs
horseshoe passage; of the Local Plans and proposed schemes are
able to demonstrate that there would be no
b) Crossing structures to maintain connectivity with adverse effect on the integrity of the North
existing bat commuting routes; Somerset and Mendip Bats SAC and the Bath
c) Crossing structures to be unlit. and Bradford-on-Avon Bats SAC either alone or
in combination.

185
Joint Local Transport Plan 4 2020-2036

Appendix 3:
Major scheme details continued

Water pollution & marine litter M5 Junction 19 (E3)
A risk of an adverse effect on the integrity of the Pill Station (C3)
Severn Estuary has been identified due to water M5 new junction J21A (E6)
pollution and litter during scheme construction. It
is therefore recommended that the JLTP4 states Physical modification of watercourses
that any scheme which has the potential to have an
A risk of an adverse effect on the integrity of the
adverse impact on the water quality of the Severn
Severn Estuary has been identified due to physical
Estuary during construction should ensure that
modification of watercourses potentially used by
best practice pollution prevention guidelines are
fish species associated with the Severn Estuary
followed, including adherence with the following
SAC and Ramsar. It is therefore recommended
CIRIA guidance documents to manage construction
that the JLTP4 states that any scheme which
run-off:
crosses a watercourse linked to the Severn Estuary
• CIRIA C532 (2001). Control of water pollution should ensure it does not result in a barrier to fish
from construction sites. Guidance for consultants passage by ensuring crossing points are designed
and contractors; and constructed in accordance with best practice
guidance, including adherence to the Environment
• CIRIA C648 (2006) – Control of Water Pollution Agency Fish Pass Manual (2010).
from Linear Construction Projects; and
These schemes are:
• CIRIA C692 (2010) – Environmental Good
Bristol City Centre to North Fringe (T4)
Practice on site. 3rd Edition.
Local improvements to road network in Nailsea
Where a risk of an adverse effect on the integrity area (LP2)
of the Severn Estuary has been identified due
M5 J19 & J20 improved multimodal connections
to water pollution and litter during scheme, this
(LP2)
could be mitigated by incorporating interceptors
into the scheme design to trap the silt, oil and A371 / A368 Banwell Bypass (E20)
other possible contaminants in run-off to prevent M5 new junction J21A (E6)
pollution and degradation of the downstream
habitats. This should be designed in accordance A summary of all mitigations can be found at Table
with current best practice, including adherence to 14.1 in the final HRA Appropriate Assessment
the DMRB Volume 11 Section 3 Part 10 HD 45/09 Report on the JLTP4 section of the travelwest
Road Drainage and the Water Environment. The website. The resulting updates to the plan, including
schemes that this applies to are: all comments from the consultation period
regarding the environmental effects of the plan,
Bristol City Centre to North Fringe (T4)
will also be published on the JLTP4 section of the
Local improvements to road network in Nailsea travelwest website in Spring 2020 as part of the
area (LP2) SEA Statement.
M5 J19 & J20 improved multimodal connections
(LP2)
A371 / A368 Banwell Bypass (E20)
A4 Portway Park & Ride expansion (LP4)
M49 Avonmouth Junction Upgrade (C1)

186
March 2020

Appendix 4:
JLTP4 Consultation Report

187
Draft Joint Local Transport Plan 4
Consultation Report
January 2020
Contents
Introduction to JLTP4 ................................................................................................................. 3
What is JLTP4? ....................................................................................................................... 3
What you said ........................................................................................................................ 3
Next steps .............................................................................................................................. 4
Consultation approach ............................................................................................................... 5
Priority simulator tool ............................................................................................................ 5
Questionnaire ........................................................................................................................ 5
Webpage and video ............................................................................................................... 5
Digital campaign..................................................................................................................... 5
Materials ................................................................................................................................ 6
Summary ................................................................................................................................ 6
Easy-Read version .................................................................................................................. 6
Advisory Group ...................................................................................................................... 6
Stakeholder workshop ........................................................................................................... 6
Consultation results ................................................................................................................... 7
Summary statistics ................................................................................................................. 7
Questionnaire and priority simulator tool: overview ............................................................ 7
Demographic information...................................................................................................... 7
Questionnaire: multiple choice.............................................................................................. 9
Questionnaire: free text box, email and letter .................................................................... 14
Priority simulator tool: prioritising transport measures ..................................................... 15
Priority simulator tool: free text box ................................................................................... 23
Stakeholder event: prioritising transport measures............................................................ 24
Stakeholder event: facilitated discussions........................................................................... 25
Methodology ............................................................................................................................ 26

2
Introduction to JLTP4
Welcome to the consultation report on the West of England’s draft Joint Local Transport Plan 4.

We took the draft JLTP4 out to public consultation between 6 February and 20 March 2019 and
received around 4,200 responses.

This document looks at the feedback we received; sets out what people in the region think and looks
at next steps.

Thank you to everyone who responded. We appreciate the time people took to respond, and the
wide range of views expressed. Your views will help ensure that a stronger and more collaborative
JLTP4 emerges as a result.

What is JLTP4?
The Joint Local Transport Plan sets out the approach to the way transport will develop up to 2036 in
the West of England, addressing existing and future transport challenges.

It’s our fourth transport plan and it sets out our aims to support clean and sustainable economic
growth, address poor air quality and take action against climate change, enable quality public
services and improve accessibility, create better places, and contribute to better health and
wellbeing.

The plan is led by the West of England Combined Authority, working with Bath & North East
Somerset, Bristol, North Somerset and South Gloucestershire councils. It builds on previous work
done in the West of England and involved collaboration with the Department of Transport, Highways
England, Network Rail, public transport operators and other organisations.

It considers a wide range of options which could support sustainable and greener travel including
cycling, walking, bus, rail, mass and rapid transit, and electric/autonomous vehicles. To do this the
JLTP4 sets out to provide a well-connected sustainable transport network that offers greater,
realistic travel choices and makes walking, cycling and public transport the natural way to travel.
Trips into and within the West of England will be seamless, faster, cheaper, cleaner and safer. That’s
our goal.

An advisory group, comprising representatives from around 20 transport operators and user groups,
was set up to provide technical and professional advice.

The alignment and locations of schemes shown on this plan are purely indicative. Any schemes
identified in JLTP4 would be subject to further detailed feasibility work and consultation, as well as
requiring planning permission.

What you said
• 79% of respondents agreed with the challenges identified by JLTP4
• 65% of respondents agreed with JLTP4’s vision and objectives
• You told us you want to see new and improved railways stations and services

3
• You told us you want more priority for active and sustainable travel, creating a
comprehensive and safe network to support active travel for shorter trips
• To help tackle congestion and air quality, you told us that you were supportive of
reallocating road space for public transport, walking and cycling
• You told us you want to see a mass transit option developed for our region
We also asked you how you think transport improvements should be funded in future. Road User
Charging or a Workplace Parking Levy were roughly two times more likely to be favoured than
Council Tax or Business Rate increases.

You told us that you want to see bus services improved across our region.

Whilst the Transport Focus survey tells us that 85% of bus passengers services are satisfied with bus
services, in this consultation it became clear that you don’t find services easy to plan, value for
money and are concerned about their reliability. This is why we are doing more work on this through
our Bus Strategy.

In the free text comments a number of people used the opportunity to highlight concerns about
specific schemes – in particular the need identified in our draft plan for an orbital corridor to the
south east of Bristol. The alignment and locations of schemes shown on this plan are purely
indicative. Any schemes identified in JLTP4 would be subject to further feasibility work and
consultation, as well as requiring planning permission.

Many of the free text comments reiterated support for the challenges and objectives identified by
JLTP4.

This feedback will be used to help shape the final JLTP4, which will be considered by our West of
England Joint Committee later in the year.

Next consultation steps
Following on from what you told us, we are also now running another two consultations which look
in more detail at bus services, walking and cycling.

Bus services

We asked some questions about bus services as part of this consultation; following on from this we
want your views on our Bus Strategy in later in the year. This will consider options to improve the
performance of the bus network across the region and set out how further growth in bus usage can
be encouraged, including proposals to create better, faster, more reliable and more accessible
services.

Walking and cycling

We will also be running a consultation on our Cycling and Walking Plan – this is a more detailed plan
which proposes investment in cycling and walking routes of £411 million over the next 16 years. It
aims to provide high quality infrastructure to support our transition to a region where cycling and
walking are the preferred choice for shorter trips.

4
Consultation approach
Given this is the most ambitious JLTP that has been produced by the West of England we wanted to
ensure that as many people as possible had a chance to respond to the consultation on the
document. As such, we were keen to explore new ways of engaging with the public to try to
encourage those who do not usually take part in public consultations.

Priority simulator tool
We were aware of previous consultations that had been carried out in the region that had used a
simulator tool to allow people to respond by allocating points to a set of policies and measures. This
approach allowed those policies and measures to be prioritised in a meaningful way whilst at the
same time helping to inform those people of the consequences of their selections.

This method was adapted for the JLTP4 consultation with the creation of a simulator tool that
allowed people to have a ‘budget’ of 20 points and a maximum allocation of up to five points for
each transport measure featured in the JLTP4 to identify what transport measures they would like to
see prioritised. More points could be ‘earned’ by selecting any of the proposed funding measures
that feature in the JLTP4, which in turn could be allocated to more transport measures. Through this
simulator approach, people were given an insight into the challenge of prioritising transport
improvements in the region with a limited budget and highlighted that in order to achieve more we
would have to identify new ways to fund them. The simulator was used to gather responses on the
types of measures that our people want to see prioritised as well as the level of support for
measures to fund them.

Questionnaire
Accompanying the simulator, we were interested in capturing views on the proposed objectives and
approaches as set out in the draft JLTP4. As such, a questionnaire was created, asking how strongly
people agreed with the vision, objectives and approaches set out in the draft JLTP4. The
questionnaire was available both online and in paper format (available at libraries) and allowed
respondents to provide any additional comments in a free text section.

Webpage and video
We created a short video that summarised the JLTP4 and explained what it seeks to do, how the
consultation works and what the next steps will be following the consultation. A dedicated
consultation webpage was included on the Travelwest website. The webpage included links to the
draft of the full JLTP4, a summary of the JLTP4, and an easy read version for accessibility purposes,
as well as other key documents such as environmental and habitat reports and the previous JLTP4.

Digital campaign
Use of social media has the potential to engage with a considerably wider audience than traditional
methods alone. At the time of the consultation, West of England authorities’ Twitter accounts had
over 140,000 followers. Given the potential reach of our social media, the West of England

5
Combined Authority’s communications team led the social media activity/advertising via the
Travelwest Twitter and Facebook accounts and drafted a social media toolkit for the West of England
councils to coordinate their accounts. Over the course of the consultation, the social media activity
exceeded over half a million views.

Materials
Posters, postcards and hard copies of the JLTP4 summary and the questionnaire were sent to the
larger libraries and customer service points around the region. The posters and postcards contained
the web address, encouraging people to complete the consultation online. The paper copies of the
questionnaire were made available for anyone for whom accessing online information is difficult.

Summary
A summary of the draft JLTP4 was also created to make it easier for people to engage with the
content. The document made available on the Travelwest website and hard copy by request.

Easy-Read version
Throughout the consultation process we engaged very closely with equalities groups and
subsequently an easy read version of the draft JLTP4 document was created for people with a
learning disability who like clearly written words with pictures to help them understand. These were
made available on the Travelwest website, with hard copies available on request.

Advisory Group
To build upon the success of the JLTP3 an Advisory Group was established to provide technical and
professional advice and guide the development of JLTP4. Comprising of key transport operators and
providers, transport user groups, delivery partners and discipline experts two workshops took place.
These provided the West of England authorities with advice on issues, challenges, types of
interventions, areas of focus, and innovation and helped build on existing partnerships to continue
improving the region.

Stakeholder workshop
The draft JLTP4 was launched to stakeholders in February 2019 at the Somerdale Pavilion in
Keynsham. The event was attended by approximately 100 stakeholders from a range of
organisations including transport operators, user groups, statutory bodies, campaign groups, health
professionals, environmental organisations and academia. The purpose of the event was to:

• Provide an overview of the draft JLTP4 document, strategy and transport measures

• Explain the consultation and how feedback will guide the development of the final plan

• Stimulate discussion about the plan and gain some initial feedback
• Encourage people to spread the word about the consultation, including the priority
simulator tool and questionnaire

6
Consultation results
Summary statistics
• 539, 536 views on social media
• 67,443 views of our engagement video
• 11,200 website views
• 4,090 document downloads
• 4,192 responses, including:
Letters/emails: 1,979
Online questionnaire responses: 1,317
Paper questionnaire responses: 28
Priority simulator tool responses: 868

Questionnaire and priority simulator tool: overview
Respondents could complete the questionnaire (online or offline), the priority simulator tool (online
only), or both. The simulator asked respondents to identify their priorities for specific measures,
whereas the questionnaire asked respondents their views on the content of the Joint Local Transport
Plan. The questionnaire included sections of the strategy and asked respondents how far they agree
with each section

Demographic information
The priority simulator tool attracted a significantly younger demographic and was slightly more
popular with female participants as illustrated in the figures below.

Figure 1: Age of participants completing Questionnaire and Priority Simulator Tool
Questionnaire Priority tool Mean

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%
Under 18 18-24 25-44 45-64 65-74 Over 75

7
Figure 2: Gender of participants completing Questionnaire and Priority Simulator Tool
Questionnaire Priority tool

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%
Female Male Transgender Other Prefer not to say

8
Questionnaire: multiple choice
How far do you agree with the challenges identified in the West of England JLTP4?

60%
55%

50%

40%

30%
24%

20%

11%
10%
6% 5%

0%
Strongly agree Agree Neither agree or Disagree Strongly disagree
disagree

How far do you agree with the vision and objectives identified in the West of England
JLTP4?

60%

49%
50%

40%

30%

20% 16% 17%

10%
10% 8%

0%
Strongly agree Agree Neither agree or Disagree Strongly disagree
disagree

9
How far do you agree with our approach for improving connectivity for trips beyond the
West of England?

50%

45% 43%

40%

35%

30%

25% 23%

20%

15% 12% 12%
10%
10%

5%

0%
Strongly agree Agree Neither agree or Disagree Strongly disagree
disagree

How far do you agree with our approach for improving connectivity for trips within in the
West of England?

45% 42%
40%

35%

30%

25%
19%
20%

15% 14% 14%
11%
10%

5%

0%
Strongly agree Agree Neither agree or Disagree Strongly disagree
disagree

10
How far do you agree with our approach for improving connectivity for local trips in the
West of England?

45%
40%
40%

35%

30%

25%

20% 17%
16% 15%
15% 12%

10%

5%

0%
Strongly agree Agree Neither agree or Disagree Strongly disagree
disagree

How far do you agree with our approach for improving connectivity for neighbourhood trips
in the West of England?

45%
40%
40%

35%

30%

25%

20% 18%
16%
14%
15% 12%

10%

5%

0%
Strongly agree Agree Neither agree or Disagree Strongly disagree
disagree

11
To support the development of the Bus Strategy, we asked three questions about buses in the West
of England:

How far do you agree that it is easy to plan and make a journey by bus in the West of
England?

40%
36%
35%

30%

25% 22%
20% 19%
20%

15%

10%

5% 3%

0%
Strongly agree Agree Neither agree or Disagree Strongly disagree
disagree

How far do you agree that bus services in the West of England are reliable?

40% 37%

35%

30%
25%
25%
22%

20%
15%
15%

10%

5%
1%
0%
Strongly agree Agree Neither agree or Disagree Strongly disagree
disagree

12
How far do you agree that travelling by bus in the West of England is good value for
money?

35%

30%
30% 28%
25%
25%

20%

14%
15%

10%

5% 3%

0%
Strongly agree Agree Neither agree or Disagree Strongly disagree
disagree

13
Questionnaire: free text box, email and letter
The graph below shows the most responded to issues in the JLTP4, by theme, received via email, letter, and the free-text section of the questionnaire.

Disagree with South East Bristol Orbital Corridor
Agree with challenges and objectives
Strategic Development Locations are badly connected/in wrong location
JLTP4 is contradictory
Concerned about budget gap and Plan's affordability
Airport needs better transport infrastructure to expand
Need more detail of Banwell bypass
M5 A38 corridor not justified
Banwell bypass in isolation would increase congestion/increase driving
Evidence for approach needed
Tickenham Road is not suitable for growth and requires a bypass
Park and Ride not needed at Whitchurch
New roads will create congestion
Improving public transport services should be a priority
Do not support new road building
Welcome/support of the document
Support measures for cycling

0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
Number of responses

14
Priority simulator tool: prioritising transport measures
Respondents to the simulator allocated up to five points to the transport measures they would like to prioritise in the West of England. The charts below
show the average points allocated to each funding measure and each transport measure from most popular to least.

How people would increase transport funding

Road pricing e.g. congestion charge to drive into specific areas

Workplace parking levy

Business rate increase

Council tax increase

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2
Average number of points allocated

15
Where people responded from
We were keen to explore where people who responded to the consultation live to get a better understanding of the issues or priorities people face in
different parts of the region. The maps below show how people would increase transport funding and where people responded from in the region.

Road pricing eg. congestion charge to drive into specific areas Workplace parking levy

16
Business rate increase Counc il tax increase

17
Improve bus facilities Restrict polluting vehicles

18
How people would prioritise transport spending

Provide new and improved rail stations and services

Create a comprehensive and safe network to support active travel for shorter trips

Reallocate highway space to public transport, walking and cycling

Construct a mass transit network

Improve bus facilities

Restrict the most polluting vehicles from areas of poor air quality

Use technology to improve capacity of existing roads

Use mechanisms to reduce dependency on private car use in urban areas

Create a ring of Park & Ride sites serving the main urban areas

Promote and expand the use of electric vehicles

Expand the metrobus network

Use technology to enable seamless journeys

Improve road safety through road design and road-user training

Construct and/or improve motorway junctions

Improve the efficiency of freight movements

Use technology to reduce the need to travel

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
Average number of points allocated

19
Where people responded from
We were keen to explore where people who responded to the consultation live to get a better understanding of the issues or priorities people face in
different parts of the region. The maps below show how people would prioritise transport spending and where people responded from in the region.

Provide new and improved rail services Create a comprehensive and safe network to support active travel
for shorter trips

20
Reallocate highway space to public transport, walking and cycling Construct a mass transit network

21
Improve bus facilities

22
Priority simulator tool: free text box
The graph below shows the issues most frequently raised by people in the free-text section of the priority simulator tool.

Active and sustainable transport need to be prioritised

Not supportive of new roads/new roads will create congestion

Support the ambition of mass transit

Do not support planning for car use

Need more commitment to cycling, including better segregation

Current bus services are unreliable

Need reduced/subsidised/free bus fares

Support investment in buses

0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25%

23
Stakeholder event: prioritising transport measures
We ran an adapted offline version of the priority simulator tool at the stakeholder event. Attendees were each given stickers and asked to allocate them
against which transport measures they supported or opposed on a chart. 348 stickers were allocated, and their distribution is shown below.

Provide new and improved rail stations and services

Create a comprehensive and safe network to support active travel for shorter trips

Reallocate highway space to public transport, walking and cycling

Improve bus facilities

Construct a mass transit network

Use mechanisms to reduce dependency on private car use in urban areas

Promote and expand the use of electric vehicles

Restrict the most polluting vehicles from areas of poor air quality

Create a ring of Park & Ride sites serving the main urban areas

Use technology to reduce the need to travel

Use technology to enable seamless journey

Improve the efficiency of freight movements

Use technology to more effectively manage road space

Improve road safety through road design and road-user training

Construct and/or improve motorway junctions

Expand the metrobus network

Improve capacity of existing roads e.g. increase junction capacity

0% 2% 4% 6% 8% 10% 12% 14% 16% 18% 20%

Strongly agree Agree Neither Disagree Strongly disagree

24
Stakeholder event: facilitated discussions
Stakeholders were invited to provide feedback on the various aspects of the plan including the vision,
objectives and challenges as well as the concept of the four connectivity levels and the policies,
interventions and actions that were being proposed as part of these.

The facilitated discussions covered a wide range of issues which were grouped into three main themes:

Interchange and connectivity
• Most modes of transport (walking, bus, rail, e-bikes) cover multiple levels of connectivity to some
degree, and all play a role in contributing to multi stage journeys.
• Facilitation of multimodal journeys requires the development of high-quality and attractive
infrastructure including new rail stations and rail services, safe cycle routes, prioritised bus lanes and
user-friendly and inter-modal transport hubs which also recognise the role of the taxi.
• Rural locations require some form of non-car transport provision
• Demand for orbital bus routes
• Public transport needs to be attractively priced with an easy to understand fare structure

Environment
• Building new roads will worsen carbon emissions
• Low carbon transport to the Airport is negated if airport expansion permitted
• Freight (HGVs) should be restricted within city centres
• Decision makers need to be bold about introducing potentially unpopular measures to restrict car
use, e.g. Workplace Parking Levy for city centre employers to achieve the required mode shift.

Delivery
• Need to consider those with limited access to technology
• Behaviour change initiatives are low cost, and can be delivered quickly compared to infrastructure
• Tourism should be considered

25
Methodology
A wide range of people participated in the consultation. Different ways of consulting (e.g. priority simulator
tool, questionnaire) resulted in slightly different demographics: the priority simulator tool was more popular
with the 25-44 age range, and women, although overall slightly more men responded to the consultation
than women. By making use of digital methods of consultation and targeting younger demographics when
promoting the consultation on social media, we received greater representation in those age groups than
other comparable consultations.

26
