Workplace parking levy 

Skip to content 

bristol.gov.uk

Search Search 

Your accounts 

For residents 

Streets and travel 

Transport plans and projects 

Workplace parking levy 

Workplace parking levy 

Information about the project to explore a workplace parking levy for Bristol.

In September 2024, the Transport and Connectivity policy committee approved to spend up to £1 million on the stage one development of a workplace parking levy (sometimes shortened to WPL) project, including preparation of an outline business case. It was agreed this would be funded from Clean Air Zone revenue funding .

What a workplace parking levy is

A workplace parking levy is an annual charge paid to the Local Transport Authority, which in Bristol would be Bristol City Council, by employers on any parking spaces they provide at their workplace. It's administered by a licensing scheme.

The aim is to encourage employers to manage the number of workplace parking spaces they provide, and promote the use of sustainable transport.

Why we're exploring a workplace parking levy

Bristol faces significant challenges around traffic congestion, air quality, and the need for improved transport choices across the city.

We're exploring a workplace parking levy because traffic congestion:

makes it harder for local businesses to compete

creates challenges for accessing businesses

stops people getting to work easily

slows down deliveries which means goods take longer to reach businesses

overall, costs local businesses and the economy millions of pounds every year

has a significant negative impact on the environment and climate, and the health and lives of citizens

The levy's aim is to offer realistic alternatives to using private cars by delivering high quality sustainable transport options using the revenue generated from the scheme.

How we're developing a workplace parking levy

We're currently developing an Outline Business Case (OBC) for the scheme. The OBC will evaluate the feasibility and value of the proposed project, detailing its objectives, costs, benefits, and risks.

When the workplace parking levy will begin

No decision on whether to introduce a workplace parking levy scheme has been made yet.

We're currently in the discovery phase of the project and spending time learning about the range of factors that go into designing a scheme for Bristol.

Updates on the scheme's progress will be published on this page and discussed in public meetings of the Transport and Connectivity policy committee . It's this committee that will have the final decision on the possible introduction of a scheme when an informed proposal is ready for presentation.

The development of a Workplace Parking Levy scheme involves three key stages:

Outline Business Case, 2025 to 2026: 1 year

Public Consultation and Full Business Case with approval, 2026 to 2027: 1 year to 18 months

Implementation and Operation, 2028 to 2029: 1 to 2 years

Further reading

Ten years on: Nottingham's Workplace Parking Levy keeps the city moving ahead (My Nottingham News) 

Transport plans and projects Joint local transport plan 2020 to 2036 
Metrobus 
Traffic monitoring 
Traffic signs 
Road safety plans 
Transport corridor projects 
Victoria Street improvements 
Workplace parking levy 
King Street pedestrianisation 
Upgrading to LED street lighting 

Tell us about a problem with a form, page or account 

Contact 
Complaints and feedback 
Cookies 
Privacy 
Accessibility 

Social links

Follow us:

Facebook 

Twitter 

Youtube 

Nextdoor 

Instagram 

Copyright © 2026 Bristol City Council
